Characters
Acrobat
Traits: The acrobat adds +1/2 L to Attack rolls and +L to Defense rolls.
Tricks: An acrobat has L+3 Trick points. Spend 1 point to perform a Trick. Trick points replenish between adventures. When resting, the PC recovers Tier Trick points (e.g., a L5 Expert acrobat recovers 2 Trick points when resting), in addition to recovering 1 Life.

Trick List
Leap out of Harm: Reroll a failed Save vs. any non-magical danger. This may not be used
against spells, gases, poison, or gaze attacks.

Shift Position: Instantly trade places in the Marching Order with an ally.
Distract: Reduce a Foe's L by Tier for the remainder of the encounter. This does not work against Weird Monsters and Vermin. Multiple sources of distraction are NOT cumulative.
Flip Kick: Perform an unarmed attack ignoring the -2 unarmed modifier. If you roll a 1, you lose your balance and must skip your next turn.
Double Kick: Perform an unarmed attack at -1 (instead of -2), against TWO different Minor Foes at the same time. The 2 attacks may not slay more than 1 Foe each. If you roll a 1 on a Double Kick attack, skip your next turn to regain your balance.
Evade: Move out of a melee without suffering any attack.
Graceful Move: Perform an elegant spin to impress others, gaining a reroll of a failed Save to woo, seduce or impress a NPC.
Serpent Twist: Automatically escape from bonds and Foes which prevent their target from fleeing with tendrils, tentacles, bear-hugging, ropes, man-catchers, etc.
Knife Throw: Throw a small bladed weapon, adding +Tier to the Attack roll. This attack ignores the -1 for a ranged Light weapon.



19

Characters

Acrobatic Performance: You perform in public. This may be used only in settlements. Spend 1 Trick point to gain d6gp with a successful Save vs. L6. Spend as many Trick points as desired on this performance, gaining d6gp per point spent. On a roll of 1, your performance is lousy or offen- sive. Choose: You are either fined for the same amount of money you would have gained, or hit by an angry crowd and lose Tier Life. If you don't have enough gp to pay for the fine, you will be hit.
Vaulting Strike: Once per combat, on your first turn and only if the party was not surprised, spend 1 Trick point to leap into combat, adding +L to this Attack roll. On a roll of 1, you land badly and will have -2 on all De- fense rolls performed on the Foes' first turn, and at least one attack from the Foes MUST be assigned to you.
Juggling: Spend 1 Trick point to gain the equivalent of an additional free hand for the duration of an
encounter.
Life: L+3.
Armor allowed: None.
Weapons allowed: Light weapons, light ranged weap- ons.
Advanced skills: As a rogue.
Magic Use: As a rogue.
Saves: As a rogue. Always add
+L to swimming, climbing, and Saves to avoid falling damage (such as trap Saves vs. pitfalls, chutes, trapdoors, etc.). Add +1/2 L to Saves vs. other Traps.
Starting equipment: Light weapon (knife or club), rope, loose clothes.
Starting wealth: d6gp
Stealth: +L
Optional Trait: Pick one or roll on the Acrobat Trait Table.


20

Characters


Acrobat Trait Table (Pick 1 or roll d6)1Graceful Dodge. Once per combat, reduce damage from a physical at- tack by 1. This may bring damage to zero.2Quick Climber. You add +Tier on Climbing Saves.3Master of Evasion. You may use your Evade ability without spending any Trick points.4Distracting Feint. Once per combat, prevent a Foe from performing their next attack. Foes with more than 1 attack will skip a single attack, not their complete turn. You must be in melee contact to use this abili- ty. You cannot use this ability in a corridor if you are in the rearguard.5Distract. Once per combat and for a single turn, reduce a Foe's L by 1 You must be in melee with the Foe to use this ability. You cannot use this ability in a corridor if you are in the rearguard.6Quick Draw Talent. You may draw a weapon or exchange weapons in no time, for example putting away a sling and drawing a dagger in the same turn, and attacking. You may still perform a single Attack roll per turn.
21

Characters
Assassin
Combat: Assassins add +L to Attack rolls with all melee or ranged weapons.
Hide in Shadows: An assassin can use a turn to hide in shadows and mark a target. Perform a Stealth Save, adding the assas- sin's L, against the Foes' L. If the roll fails, the assassin receives a free attack by the Foe (roll for Defense). If the Save succeeds, on the following turn, the assassin's next attack (if successful) against the marked target will inflict triple damage (e.g., 3 if you reach the Foe's L, 6 if you double it).
 The target must be a living creature with a discernible anatomy: undead, artificial crea-
 tures (including automatons, robots, golems, elementals), jellies, oozes, molds and spirits will not suffer any extra damage. At L4 an assassin
may spend 1 XP to become able to affect these.
Only one assassin can hide in the shadows at a time. If all other allies are invisible, unreachable or otherwise impossible to attack, the assassin cannot hide in the shadows.
Assassins can use any weapons, including firearms. They can use items reserved for rogues, e.g., lock-picks, poison experts from Four Against the Abyss and athames from Four Against the Netherworld.
Saves: As a rogue. Add +L to disguise Saves. Assassins can find and dis- arm Traps and pick locks, but they do not add +L to these rolls.
Armor allowed: Light armor only.
Weapons allowed: Any.
Starting Equipment: Any two weapons, light armor, lock-picks.
Starting wealth: 5d6gp.
Life: L+3. A L1 assassin has 4 Life.
Advanced skills: Acute Hearing, Danger Sense, Deadly Strike, Detective, Intuition, Knife Throwing, Quick Footed, Spore Alche- my, Spot Weakness, Stabbing Attack, Sworn Enemy, Vampire Hunter, Withstand Pain, Whirlwind of Steel.

22

Characters


Optional Trait: Pick or roll a Trait from the Table below.





23

Characters
Barbarian
Combat: Barbarians add +L to their melee and ranged Attack rolls.
Rage: Barbarians can perform a number of rage attacks per adventure equal to 1+1 for each 2 full levels (2 attacks at L2, 3 at L4, and so on). When performing a rage attack, roll the die 3 times and choose the best result. If a rage attack hits, it inflicts double damage.
 Example: A L4 barbarian uses a rage attack against a L4 Foe. The barbarian rolls the d6 three times. The highest result is a 5, so the total is 5+4=9. The attack inflicts 4 damage: 1
 for a successful attack, +1 because it doubled the target's L, x2 because rage attacks inflict double damage.
No Magic: A barbarian may not use magic items, scrolls, or potions. The PC may use herbal remedies and other non-magical healing (resting, bandages, nourishing meals, and so on). The PC will accept healing from a cleric, since it is divine and not magical. Barbarians may use holy water.
Illiterate: Barbarians can't read and cannot get any benefit from a book or any other written material, such as gaining Clues from an inscription.
Armor allowed: Light armor, shield.
Weapons allowed: Any except firearms.
Starting equipment: Light armor, shield, hand weapon. You may trade in shield and hand weapon for a
two-handed weapon, or for a bow and a light weapon.
Starting wealth: d6gp.
Life: L+7. A L1 barbarian has 8 Life.
Magic Use: None.
Stealth: +1/2 L
Saves: As a barbarian.


24

Characters


Optional Trait: Pick or roll a Trait from the following Table.


Barbarian Traits Table (Pick 1 or roll d6)1Beast Slayer. You have +1 to Attack rolls vs. Weird Monsters.2Berserk Fighting. Once per adventure, deal +1 extra damage with all of your attacks, for the duration of an entire combat. This is tiring: after using this Trait you are at -1 on all Attack rolls for 6 rooms/60 minutes, or until you Rest, whichever comes first.3Herbal Knowledge. Once per adventure, you can automatically find and prepare herbs, moss or mushrooms to heal d3 Life. You may not use this Trait in settings without vegetation (e.g., the Netherworlds, arctic envi- ronment, the Moon).4Survival Instinct. Gain +1 bonus on rolls to find food or avoid getting lost in the wilderness, or use this Trait to avoid 1 Wandering Monster encoun- ter or 1 Trap, once per adventure. Avoiding means you ignore a rolled encounter or Trap BEFORE playing it.5Tough Skinned. Once per combat, you may reduce damage from a single attack by 1. Damage can be lowered to zero.6Literate. You can read-unusual for barbarians. You still are not allowed to cast spells from scrolls, but you may gain Clues, learn skills and other information from written texts.


















Characters
Bulwark
Combat: Bulwarks add +1/2L to melee At- tack rolls and Defense rolls. They add +Tier to ranged Attack rolls.
Rare: You may have a single bulwark in your party.
 Limited healing: Bulwarks may use bandages like any other PC, but they may be healed with other forms of healing (Healing prayers, spells, potions, etc.) ONLY if no other PC is wounded. Except for bandages, you must heal all other wound- ed PCs before healing the bulwark. When
   the bulwark is down to the last Life point, you may prioritize healing the bulwark.

Armor allowed: Light armor, heavy armor, shield.
Weapons allowed: Any except firearms.
Starting equipment: Heavy armor, shield, hand weapon.
Starting wealth: d6gp.
Life: L+7. A L1 bulwark has 8 Life.
Magic Use: Any magic items allowed to warriors. Bulwarks cast spells from scrolls as L1 wizards.
Stealth: No bonus.
Saves: As a warrior.
Advanced Skills: At L5+, the bulwark learns advanced skills like a war- rior. In addition, they may learn the Sacrifice Defense and Sacrifice Shield described below.
Expert Skill: Sacrifice Defense (bulwark only)
Once per turn, if an ally or NPC with the party takes damage in combat, you may attempt a Defense roll against the attack. On a successful De- fense roll, you take the damage instead. The damage must be taken in its entirety, including performing Saves vs. any additional effects (e.g., Save vs. poison on a poisoned arrow). This skill may not be used for sources
of damage other than combat (e.g., gaze attacks, spells, Traps, not even Traps that trigger a Defense roll).

26

Characters

Expert Skill: Shield Sacrifice (bulwark only)
You may sacrifice your shield to let an ally repeat a failed Save against a trap or against any danger which can be avoided with a Save, not a De- fense roll. This skill may be used once per encounter, and the bulwark's shield is destroyed. You may carry a replacement shield on their back, and 2 more on a mount.


Bulwark Traits Table (Pick 1 or roll d6)1Shieldwall. Once per adventure, if you and an adjacent ally both carry shields, both of you gain +1 Defense against melee attacks for the rest of the encounter. The bonus is lost if you or the ally are knocked out, killed, defeated or incapacitated. You are adjacent to an ally if you occupy position 1 of the Marching Order and the ally occupies position 2, or if you occupy position 3 and the ally occupies position 4.2Guardian Stance. If an adjacent ally is attacked, you may take the hit instead. You must declare this before the Defense roll is made. You are entitled to a Defense roll against the original attack's L. This Trait can save badly wounded allies from Foes striking at random targets.3Iron Will. Reroll all failed Saves vs. Madness or mental effects (fear, charm, illusion, mermaid or harpy's song, mind control, etc.). Ignore the first point of Madness you receive in an adventure.4Shield Bash. Once per combat, after a successful Defense roll, you may immediately perform an Attack roll with your shield, in the Foes' turn. Add +L to this roll. You need a shield to use this Trait.5Brace for Impact. Once per combat, reduce damage from a single attack by 1. Damage can be lowered to zero.6Stubborn Endurance. When a blow reduces you to 1 or 0 Life, you may remain at 2 Life instead. You can use this Trait once per adventure. You may not use it if the blow reduces your Life below zero.
27

Characters
Cleric
Combat: Clerics add +1/2 L to their melee and ranged Attack rolls, and +L vs. undead.
Prayer: Clerics use spell-like powers called prayers. Prayers may be used during com- bat and do not require a free hand to be cast. Using a prayer requires 1 turn.
 Healing: You may use this prayer 3 times per adventure, healing d6+L Life equal to an ally or yourself.
Blessing: You may use this prayer 3 times per adventure. Blessing removes a game
  condition, such as being turned to stone or cursed. The description will tell if it may be removed with a Blessing.
Armor allowed: Light armor, heavy armor, shield.
Weapons allowed: Light, two-handed, hand weapon, sling.
Starting equipment: Light armor, shield, hand weapon. You may trade shield and hand weapon for a two-handed weapon.
Starting wealth: d6gp.
Life: L+4. A L1 cleric has 5 Life.
Magic Use: Any item not explic- itly forbidden to clerics.
Stealth: +1/2 L
Saves: As a cleric.
Advanced Skills: As a cleric.
Optional Trait: Pick or roll 1 Trait on the Table below.




28

Characters



Cleric Traits Table (Pick 1 or roll d6)1Blessed Touch. Once per adventure, you may use 1 turn to heal Tier Life without using a Healing prayer. All points must be healed on a single PC or NPC that you are able to touch.2Sacred Defense. You have +1 to Defense rolls vs. all Demon and Undead Foes.3Divine Protection. Once per adventure, gain +1 to Defense rolls and Saves for the duration of a single combat.4Holy Resilience. Gain +1 extra Life at character creation. At L10, gain another extra Life point.5Chant of Valor. Once per adventure, you may give +1 to the Attack rolls of all allies, including hirelings and animal companions. The bonus lasts a single turn. This is a free action so you may perform another action while using the Chant of Valor.6Strength of Spirit. When a blow reduces you to zero Life or below, you may remain at 1 Life instead. You may use this Trait only once per adven- ture.29

Characters
Dwarf
Combat: Dwarves add +L to all melee Attack rolls. They add no bonus with ranged weap- ons. They have +1 to Defense rolls vs. giants,
ogres and trolls, and +1 to melee and ranged Attack rolls vs. goblins.
Gold Sense: You can smell gold and gems and appraise valuables. When you meet a Foe, Save vs. L6 (add +L to the roll). If
 successful, roll for the Foe's Treasure before deciding your course of action. This may help you decide whether it's worth fighting against that Foe.
   Miser: Dwarves are extremely attached to their gold. A party with 2+ dwarves may not Bribe Foes.
    Greedy: When the party finds loot containing any gold, each dwarf in the party must be assigned at least 1gp.
Jewelry Merchant: When selling gems, crystals or jewelry, increase the re- sale value by 20%, rounded down. E.g., if selling a ruby worth 100gp, you sell it for 120gp. Count the item's increased value if it is used as a Bribe.
Armor allowed: Light armor, heavy armor, shield.
Weapons allowed: Any, including firearms.
Starting equipment: Light armor, shield, hand weapon. You may trade shield and hand weapon for a two-handed weapon and heavy armor.
Starting wealth: 3d6gp.
Life: L+5. A L1 dwarf has 6 Life.
Magic Use: Any item not forbidden to dwarves.
Stealth: +1/2 L
Saves: As a dwarf.
Advanced Skills: As a dwarf.
Optional Trait: Pick or roll 1 Trait on the Dwarf Trait Table below.



30

Characters





31

Characters
Druid
Combat: Druids add +1/2 L to melee and ranged Attack rolls.
Magic: Druids have 2+L spell slots and can cast druid spells, adding +L to their spell- casting rolls. They do not learn spells from books, but meditate between adventures to memorize spells. They can use any spells from the basic druid spell list. They can learn spells from the Expert druid list during adventures. At L5+, you may add 1 spell to their repertoire as follows:
1) When a Quest is completed, you may get 1 Expert spell instead of an Epic Reward;
 2) You may spend 3 Clues or 1 successful XP roll to learn a new spell;
3) The druid may use 1 Expert Druid scroll to learn the spell. This destroys the scroll.
    Druids can cast spells not on their list from scrolls and magic items, but add only +1/2 L to the spellcasting roll, with a minimum bonus of +1. Druids may NOT learn non-druid spells.
Animal Companion: You may have 1 animal companion in addition to a mount. This animal comes to you of its own volition. You must not pay its cost, but must spend 1gp worth of food when the animal comes.
All animals described in this book and in The Crucible of Classic Critters are available. You have a special connection with the animal, and gain 1 Madness if it dies. As soon as you are in the wilderness, another animal of your choice will replace the dead companion. Again, you must offer 1gp of food to your new companion.
Armor allowed: Light armor, leafsteel armor, shield.
Weapons allowed: Light weapons (staff, sickle, club, dagger), javelins, short bow or sling (light ranged weapons).
Starting equipment: Light weapon.
Starting wealth: 2d6gp.
Life: L+3. A L1 druid has 4 Life.
Stealth: +1/2 L
Saves: As a cleric.


32

Characters

Expert skills: You may learn the following skills from Four Against the Abyss: Arcane Tanner, Commanding Presence, Continual Light, Detective, Intuition, Ne- gotiator, Poison Resistance, Protective Incense, Spore Alchemy, Strong Will, Terrifying Savagery. From Concise Collections of Classes: Poison Expert, Spiritual Nourish- ment, Surgeon Training.
Optional Trait: Pick or select randomly 1 Trait from the Table below:



Druid Traits Table (Pick 1 or roll d6)1Wildform. Once per adventure, you may shapeshift into a small animal (fox, bird, etc.) for the duration of 1 encounter/10 minutes. In this form, you add +1/2L to your Defense rolls, you cannot attack but automatically succeed on evading from a melee, climbing, sneaking, and escaping from bonds.2Beast Friend. You may alter by 1 all Reaction rolls of natural animals (not magical beasts; they must have the Animal tag in their description).3Verdant Blessing. Once per adventure, you may restore d3 Life to your- self or an ally while in a natural environment, including towns, swamps, mountains, fungal grottoes, forests, jungles, gardens, etc., but not a des- ert, arctic landscape or lifeless world like the Netherworld or dungeons.4Leafsteel Familiarity. Gain a further +1 to Defense rolls when wearing leafsteel armor. Leafsteel armor can be found as loot.5Nature's Bounty. Once per adventure, while in the wilderness or in the fungal grottoes, you automatically find edible plants or herbs. They count as 2 Food rations or a potion that heals 1 Life point. This healing is cumu- lative with bandages and may NOT be applied during combat.6Rootbind. Once per adventure, you can call upon the earth to entangle a Foe. The Foe loses its next turn as roots bind its legs. This Trait does not work against flying or incorporeal Foes (ghosts, spirits, specters), or Foes without a shape (blobs, slime, molds, elementals).

33

Characters
Elf
Combat: Elves add +L to all melee and ranged At- tack rolls, except with two-handed melee weap- ons. They add a further +1 vs. orcs, orc brutes,
orclings, and any other Foes with the word "orc", "orcish" or "half-orc" in their name.
Magic Use: Elves have L spell slots: they can cast 1 spell per Level per adventure. They add
+L to their spellcasting rolls, also when casting from scrolls or magic items. An elf can cast
 a spell only if wearing Light Armor, Leafsteel Armor or Elven chain-mail and NO shield. An elf can sling a shield to his/her back and ready it in 1 turn.
  Elves can use all Basic wizard spells except Blessing. They can learn other spells from the wiz-
 ard's list with a successful XP roll per spell. To study, the elf must find a scroll and consume it during the learning process; the scroll is used even if the XP roll
fails. Spells must be chosen before the beginning of the adventure.
Example: Sylthas the L4 elf has 4 spell slots. Prior to the adventure, Sylthas prepares 2 x Sleep, 1 x Escape and 1 x Lightning (total 4 spells).
Armor allowed: Any, shield.
Weapons allowed: Any, except firearms.


















34

Characters


Elf Traits Table (Pick 1 or roll d6)1Bladesong. Gain a +1 on Attack rolls with swords, spears or bows. You may use this Trait once per adventure. The bonus applies to all Attack rolls you perform during an encounter.2Forest Born. Gain +1 on rolls to navigate forests (Saves to avoid getting lost) or detect hidden things in nature (Search rolls in forests).Once per outdoor adventure, you may prevent the party from being surprised by Wandering Monsters. The encounter will still take place, but the party will act before the Wandering Monsters.3Fey Grace. Once per combat encounter, you may dodge and reduce dam- age from a physical melee attack by 1. This can bring damage to zero.
When you use this Trait, you may disengage from the melee and may run away, if desired, without suffering any extra attacks.4Spellwoven. Once per adventure, you may cast a spell without forgetting it. In other words, you cast the spell and it remains in your spell slot.5Silver tongue. You are highly charismatic and add +Tier on Saves to persuade, woo or negotiate with intelligent creatures.6Elidra's Melody. Once per adventure, you can play an instrument or sing to calm a hostile creature. You may use this Trait in combat to prevent a creature from attacking for a turn, or to reroll a Reaction roll (hoping to roll a nonviolent Reaction from the creature's Reaction Table, if possible).35

Characters
Gnome
Combat: Gnomes add +1/2 L to Defense rolls.
Magic: Gnomes have L spell slots. They can cast only a single spell, chosen from the Illusionist list. They study it using a contrap- tion with magic words engraved on gears
and lenses. Every morning, the gnome must spend a few minutes studying in a quiet surrounding to memorize the spell for the day. When casting this spell, gnomes add
+L to their spellcasting rolls.
 They can cast spells from scrolls and magic items as L1 casters. If casting spells with the words Illusion,Phantasmal or Illusionary in their name, they add +L.
Resistance: +L to Saves vs. poison and gases.
                     Gadgeteer: You add +L on rolls to disarm Traps. In addition, you receive L+6 gadget points at the beginning of an adventure. At any moment, you may spend 1 or more to perform one of the following:
1) Use a one-shot mechanical weapon to add +L to a single ranged attack. The gadget is then disabled until you spend 1 gadget point and 30 min- utes to repair it. Examples: A clockwork drone that hits the target and then runs out of energy, a spring-loaded blade, a razor-sharp yo-yo, a jack-in-the-box metal fist.
2) Open a locked door or chest, or disarm a Trap. This requires 1 turn and a successful Save vs. the Trap's or door's L. If no L is indicated, it is L6. Add the gnome's L and the number of gadget points spent to the roll. Spend the points BEFORE rolling. E.g., for a +3 bonus you spend 4 points (1 to roll, and 3 for a +3 bonus).
3) Help someone out of chains, ropes, shackles, handcuffs or other re- straints, including magical ones. This requires 1 turn and a successful Save vs. L6 (or the L of the Foe guarding the prisoner, if known and if higher than 6). Add +L to the roll. If it fails, you may try again in the following turn, but if you ever rolls a 1, the lock/chain/restraint is beyond your ability. You may not free yourself.
4) Use a smokescreen bomb that lets the party flee from a combat encoun- ter without suffering any attack. Smokescreens do not work vs. fire and smoke-based Foes like djinn, efreeti, air elementals (who automatically dissipate the smokescreen) and fire elementals. You may also give the bomb to an ally, but a PC who is not a gnome must roll a 2-in-6 chance it will not work. The bomb is used in any case.

36

Characters



5) Use a portable door to add a door on the map where there is none, provided there is a way to connect the current tile to some other tile, or turn a door into an opening or an opening into a door. You may use it to lock a door with no lock mechanism (it will remain in place until the door is destroyed or the lock opened).
6) Throw a grenade that inflicts damage equal to the number of gadget points spent minus 1, up to max. 4. It takes 1 turn to throw the grenade. It may be thrown as a ranged attack before the melee, if the gnome is not surprised. If used during melee, the grenade hits the party as well (each PC rolls d6 to determine how much damage is taken, with a maximum equal to the gadget points spent on the grenade or 4, whichever is lower). Each point of damage will automatically kill 1 Minor Foe or inflict 1 dam- age to a Major Foe.
Example: Gyrip the gnome throws a 5 point grenade as a ranged attack in a room with an orc Boss with 7 Life and 8 goblin minions with 1 Life each. The orc loses 4 Life and 4 goblins are killed.

Example 2: Gyrip's party is in melee with the same Foes. Gyrip uses 1 turn to throw the grenade. The Boss loses 4 Life. 4 goblins die. Every PC rolls d6, losing that amount of Life (maximum 4).
7) Use a gadget-enhanced weapon to add +L to all your melee attacks for the duration of an encounter. Examples: Gauntlet with protruding

37

Characters


blades, a spring-loaded hammer that spins in your hand. This weapon is im- mune to all effects that disarm, but not to Foes that destroy metallic weapons (e.g., Iron Eater). You may not lend this weapon to an ally.
8) Use clockwork armor, a suit com- posed of metallic spinning wheels and gears. It is light armor, but you can spend 1 gadget point to increase its Defense bonus to +3 until the end of the encounter. You can build a suit of clock- work armor spending 25gp in materials. It is metallic and may be destroyed by Foes that destroy metal. Due to its com- plexity, it counts as TWO items if stolen by Invisible Gremlins.
Armor allowed: Light armor, leafsteel armor, clockwork armor.
Weapons allowed: Light weapons, sling, hand weapon, bow, handgun, and any clockwork weapons found as loot.
Starting Equipment: Light weapon, contraption (used to study their chosen illusionist spell), lockpicks and preci- sion tools (resale value: 15gp).
Starting Wealth: 4d6gp.
Life: L+ 4. A L1 gnome has 5 Life.
Advanced skills: You may learn the following skills from Four Against the Abyss: Acute Hearing, Arcane Tanner, Brawler, Continual Light, Detective,
Negotiator, Quick Footed; and these from Concise Collection of Classes: Al- chemical Training, Bomb Crafting, Surgeon Training. You may also learn Troll Training from Wayfarers and Adventurers.
Saves: A gnome Saves as a rogue.
Optional Trait: Pick or roll a Trait on the following Table.


38

Characters




Gnome Traits Table (Pick 1 or roll d6)1Fixer. You have L+8 (not L+6) gadget points.2Illusionist's Trick. Once per adventure, you may cast an additional Illusionist spell of your choice without using a spell slot. Choose any spell from the illusionist's list at the moment of casting.3Clockwork Armor Specialist. When wearing clockwork armor, you gain an additional +1 Defense bonus vs. the first attack you receive in every combat. This bonus applies even if you do not spend any gadget points to activate the clockwork armor.4Trap Expert. Add +Tier on Saves to disarm Traps or lockpicking Saves. This bonus applies even when using gadget points.5Keen Nose. Gain +2 on Saves vs. gases. Once per adventure, you may automatically prevent an encounter from surprising the party - you smell the Foes coming! Use this ability AFTER a roll has indicated that the Foes surprise the party.6Clockwork Grenadier. Once per adventure, you may throw a grenade dealing 2 damage as a ranged attack before the melee begins. You may do this only if not surprised. If used during melee, you and your allies must Save vs. L4 or lose 1 Life. Damage on Foes works like a gadget grenade: you automatically inflict 2 damage on Major Foes and slay 2 Minor Foes.39

Characters
Halfling
Combat: Halflings add +L to their Defense rolls against giants, trolls, ogres, and half-giants. They add +L to attacks with slings.
 Luck: You have L+1 Luck points. You may spend 1 Luck point to run away from a melee without receiving an attack or to reroll an At- tack, Defense, Save, or Search roll, or a roll on the Treasure or Magical Treasure Table from any 4AD book. Luck points replenish between adventures. If you gain or lose 1 level immedi- ately gain or lose 1 Luck point.
 Nourishing Meal: Once per adventure when Resting,you can cook a Nourishing Meal, using 1 Food ration per ally. Any ally eating the Nourish-
                 ing Meal heals 1 Life, in addition to Life healed by resting. Halflings eating a Nourishing Meal also recover 1 Madness. If not enough rations are available, you may have only some allies eat the Nourishing Meal.
Armor allowed: Light armor.
Weapons allowed: Light weapon, sling.
Starting equipment: d6+3 Food rations, sling, light weapon.
Starting wealth: 2d6gp.
Life: L+3. A L1 halfling has 4 Life.
Magic Use: Standard use of scrolls or non-restricted magic items.
Stealth: +L to Stealth Saves.
Saves: As a halfling.
Optional Trait: Pick or select randomly 2 Traits from the Halfling Trait Table. Reroll duplicates.
Advanced Skills: As halfling.



40

Characters



Halfling Traits Table (Pick 2 or roll d6 twice)1Lucky Sidestep. Once per adventure per level, you may reroll a failed Save. If the description of the Save already allows halflings to reroll, roll twice and choose the best result.2Nimble Dodge. You gain +1 bonus to Defense rolls.3Sling Skill. You add +Tier to your Attack rolls with slings.4Iron Stomach. You are immune to ingested poison and add +Tier to all Saves vs. poison or gases. You start the game with +1 Life.5Fungi Forager. Once per adventure, if you encounter any mushroom/ fungi (including mushroom creatures, spores and fungal groves) you may do one of the following: 1) Find a rare specimen with a resale value of 3d6gp; 2) Find mushrooms allowing you to prepare a Nutritious Meal one additional time during the adventure; 3) Find a healing fungus allowing you to heal d6 Life points (divided among PCs as you see fit); 4) If the mushrooms can be turned into Food rations, double the number of Food rations found.6Comforting Cook. When you Rest, you and one ally recover 1 extra Life. You must use 1 Food ration to use this trait. This is in addition to your standard Nourishing Meal ability.

41

Characters
Illusionist
Combat: The illusionist adds +L to spellcast- ing rolls.
Spellcasting: The illusionist has L+3 spell slots, but can cast only spells from the illusionist list. On other lists, the illu- sionist can cast any spell having the word Phantasm, Illusion, Illusionary, Glamour, Mirage or Phantasmal in its name, or any spell whose description states that it is an illusion-type spell.
Distracting Lights: You can create lights, sounds and shapes to distract Foes with 1
 Turn and a spellcasting roll against the Foe's L. If successful, reduce the Foe's L by Tier for the remainder of the encounter. This does not work
                     against undead, artificial or elemental creatures. Against Minor Foes, it affects all the Foes in the group. Multiple sources of distraction are NOT cumulative. The Foe's L may not go lower than 1. If the spellcasting roll fails, the Foe is not distracted and you may NOT try again during the current encounter. This ability counts as casting a spell, but does NOT use up a spell slot. You need a free hand to cast.
Continual Light: You can cast a continual light on a medallion, tip of a staff, hat, or other item you wear. The item works like a lantern that
requires no hands to use, and will not be turned off by wind or accidents. This lasts until you are separated from the party or die.
Illusionary Knife Throw: You may spend 1 spell slot to create and throw a small, illusionary knife, adding +Tier and +L to the Attack roll. The -1 for a Light weapon does not apply. You may inflict Subdual damage if you want, ignoring the -1 Attack roll modifier for a Subdual Attack.
Armor allowed: None.
Weapons allowed: Light weapon, light ranged weapon.
Starting equipment: Knife or walking stick, clothes.
Starting wealth: 3d6gp.
Life: L+2. A L1 illusionist has 3 Life.
Magic Use: As a wizard.
Stealth: +1/2 L to Stealth Saves.

42

Characters



Saves: As a wizard.
Advanced Skills: As a wizard.
Optional Trait: Pick or roll	1
Trait from the Table below.





Illusionist Traits Table (Pick 1 or roll d6)1Phantom Reflex. Once per combat, when a Foe attacks you, you create an Illusionary Double that takes the hit instead. This counts as an automatic miss. You may not use this Trait to absorb hits from artificial creatures that see through illusions. You may not use this Trait while using an Illusionary Mirror Image.2Glamour Specialist. Gain +Tier on social/persuasion Saves when using disguise-based illusions (e.g., Glamour Mask).3Misdirection. Once per adventure, you may force a Foe to attack a phantom target instead of an ally. The phantom target defends
adding your L as its Defense roll bonus. The Foe will continue to at- tack the phantom until the phantom is hit, or you dispel it. You may not use this Trait against artificial creatures and other Foes that, as per their description, can see through illusions.4Shadow Adept. When casting Shadow Strike, add +Tier to your Spellcasting roll and treat it as magical damage against Foes not immune to illusions.5Hazy Veil. Once per adventure, you may create an illusionary fog around yourself, adding +Tier to your Defense rolls until the end of the encounter. This is not cumulative with other illusion-type spells and other illusion effects that give a bonus to Defense rolls.6Spectral Trickster. Once per adventure, after casting an illu- sion-type spell, you may vanish from sight for a few seconds. You
may flee the melee without receiving an attack and moving into the last visited tile, or remain in the current tile and perform a single out-of-turn melee attack at +Tier. This Trait will not work against Foes that see through illusion or see the invisible.  43

Characters
Kukla
Combat: Kuklas add +1 to Attack rolls with light slashing weapons; this is a one time +1 bonus, NOT a +1 per L. They add +1/2 L to Defense rolls. An unarmed kukla can claw
and bite at -1 (not -2 as normal).
 Unique Background: The kukla is a long- haired living doll - an artificial creature created by a wizard through a lengthy ritual. The kukla, built as a doll of ceramic, metal, wood and cloth, takes on a life and will of its own. A few kuklas remain faithful to their creators in a sort of child-father relationship. Others break ties and wander
in search of adventure.
Rare: You may have a single kukla in your party.
Rings: Each kukla comes with a red ring and a green ring (5gp each if resold). The green ring contains a fluid that can be used to revive a dead kukla, and the red ring contains a powerful ingestive poison.
Army of Dolls: At L5+, kuklas may build miniature dolls that fight for them or carry around their stuff. This is an Expert skill.
Secret Compartment: A kukla has a secret compartment in her torso which can house a knife, up to 5 food rations, and up to 10 small items (potions, bandages,etc.). A kukla may carry up to 100gp in coins in this compartment, and any amount of gems and jewels. Items carried in this compartment can't be stolen (e.g., by invisible gremlins) until the kukla is alive.
Size: The kukla is the size of a small child, smaller than a halfling but larger than a lutin.
Carrying capacity: The kukla may carry up to 200gp of treasure, like any hero. The kukla is not strong enough to carry a PC turned to stone, unless this is a smaller creature like a lutin or fae.
Social abilities: Due to their doll-like looks and understanding of chil- dren, kuklas add +L to social Saves with children. Kuklas may not woo, seduce or be seduced.
Prehensile hair: A kukla's long hair can manipulate objects. Kuklas add
+1/2 L to lock-picking rolls if using their hair, and may use it to tie a Foe (like a rope). The hair counts as an extra hand to carry a lantern or wave a magic wand, but it is not strong enough to swing a weapon.

44

Characters


Artificial: Kuklas are immune to poison and disease. Since they do not eat or drink, they may not use any food magic, herbal remedies or potions, with the exception of the Reviving Fluid in their green ring. They are im- mune to being turned to stone and to mind control/mind reading/mental blast abilities. They are unaffected by vampirism, energy drain, paralysis, or lycanthropy. They gain Madness like any PC - if Madness overreaches the kukla's L, her soul leaves the animated body and the kukla slumps to the ground, now a lifeless doll. A kukla's internal metal gears are encased in ceramic or wood and are immune to Foes that destroy metal.
Magical nature: A kukla's unarmed attacks are magical and can hit tar- gets hit only by magic weapons. A dead kukla may be given out as a magic item to invisible gremlins or may be swung by a large PC (e.g., green troll, minotaur, ogre) to club a Foe affected only by magic weapons.
Unhealing: A kukla may be repaired between adventures, at the cost of 1gp per Life to be repaired, but not during combat. Healing powers, includ- ing scrolls, magic items, prayers and bandages have no effect on kuklas.
Repairing a kukla includes bringing her to a doll-maker to replace broken parts and repaint scratched surfaces. In long adventures where PCs heal between chapters, the kukla may be repaired using kukla spare parts.
Spare parts: Allies (not the kukla herself) may carry spare parts to repair the kukla. This may happen when Resting. Each spare part costs 10gp, counts as 10gp of carried Treasure, and allows the kukla to regain 4 Life during a long break between chapters or between adventures. Spare parts are magic items and may be stolen by invisible gremlins.
The green ring: If a kukla is killed, a wizard, puppetmaster or alchemist may bring her back to life by pouring the liquid in her green ring into her mouth. This takes 1 turn and may be done during combat. After d6 turns, the kukla will regain all of her Life and stand up. The revitalizing liquid will work only once in a kukla's lifetime. A kukla may not drink the liquid from another kukla's ring. If there is no wizard or alchemist in the party, you may bring the kukla to be revived at a wizard's school, at the end of the adventure.
The red ring: The red ring contains a single drop of a powerful ingestive poison. Once in the kukla's lifetime, you may automatically slay any PC, NPC, or Foe who has accepted a Food bribe, had any social reaction involv- ing food or drink, or has hit the kukla with a bite attack. Foes immune to poison are unaffected. Once this is used, the only way a kukla may recover this ability is to find another red ring.
Becoming Human: Some kuklas yearn for mortality and look for a ritual that will turn them into living beings.



45

Characters


No Sense of Smell or Taste: Kuklas do not perceive the taste of food or any smell. They automatically fail any Saves based on these senses.
Mental abilities: Kuklas can read, write and speak the trade language.
Magic items: Kuklas can use magic items, including those normally restricted to wizards. A few specific magic items used only by kuklas are rumored to exist.
Scroll use: Kuklas may cast spells from scrolls.
Armor allowed: None.
Weapons allowed: Light weapon, light ranged weapon.
Starting equipment: Dagger, doll clothes, 2 rings.
Starting wealth: 3d6gp.
Life: L+5. A L1 kukla has 6 Life.
Saves: As rogues.
Stealth: +1/2 L.
New Expert Skill: Doll Army (kukla only)
Every time you find a magic item, the kukla with this skill may find a miniature doll instead. The kukla may animate the doll as an artificial creature with 1 Life. Dolls perform a single action per turn - attack a Mi- nor Foe, carry a single item or a sack containing up to 50gp, or distract
a Major Foe (giving +1 to the kukla's next Attack roll against that Foe). The kukla may control a number of dolls equal to 1/2 L. Four such minia- ture dolls occupy the same space of a human PC in the Marching Order. The dolls have no bonuses: they are just tiny automatons that carry the kukla's possessions or attack her Foes. They count as magic items (may be given to invisible gremlins or as bribes) but may not be sold (they lose all powers when more than a few yards away from the kukla).
There is no limit to the number of miniature dolls the kukla can find during an adventure, but no more than 1/2 L dolls can be animated and controlled at any given time. If the kukla loses or gains a level, adjust the number of dolls that can be controlled.






46

Characters


New Expert Skill: Improved Secret Com- partment (kukla only)
The kukla has modified her secret compart- ment. It may be accessed only by the kukla and by any ally with whom she shares this secret (you decide ).
If the party encounters spiders, centipede or other suitable Vermin, you may catch them with Subdual Attack rolls and house them
in the compartment. As an action during melee, the kukla can let the Vermin loose. This counts as an additional attack, with a bonus equal to the Vermin's L, against any single Foe in melee with the kukla. Humanoid Vermin won't fit in the hidden compartment: use your common sense and restrict this to insects, worms, etc.
Once the critters are let out, they perform a single Attack and run away. At any moment, you may subdue more and "refill" the com- partment.



47

Characters


Kukla Traits Table (pick 1 or roll d6)1Hair Mastery. Once per adventure, you may use your hair to disarm a Trap or open a lock without using your hands with a +L bonus instead of your usual
+1/2 L.2Hidden Blade. Once per encounter, you may draw a knife from your secret compartment as a free action and immediately make a surprise Attack with a
+Tier bonus to damage.3Unyielding Form. Once per adventure, ignore the loss of up to 2 points of damage during a single combat encounter. The blows bounce off the hardest parts of your body, causing no damage.4Creepy Charm. You may reroll the Reaction roll of any encounter with any living Foes. This Trait doesn't work with undead, artificial or elemental creatures, and with creatures with a fixed Reaction (such as those who always fight to the death).5Hair Bind. Once per adventure, use your prehensile hair to restrain a sin- gle Foe for 2 turns. The target's L is reduced by 2 while held. This works only against Foes of human size or smaller. You may not restrain elementals, ghosts, spirits, slimes, blobs, snakes, or hordes. If you want, all damage
inflicted on a restrained Foe is Subdual. If you flee the combat, you automati- cally release any bound Foe.6Clockwork Reflexes. Your uncanny agility allows you to reroll all failed Saves vs. Traps (to avoid their effect, not to disarm them) and all Defense rolls vs. ranged attacks.
48

Characters
Light Gladiator
Combat: Light gladiators add +1/2 L to Attack rolls, but only when using light hand weap- ons. If they use a different weapon, they lose the bonus and treat the weapon as a light
weapon. Example: a two-handed sword would be at -1 on the Attack roll.
Light gladiators add +1/2 L to Defense rolls (rounded down).
 Two Weapon Fighting: You may perform 2 Attack rolls per turn in melee if you are holding a light weapon in each hand. The 2 rolls have a normal chance of Exploding.
 Alternatively, you may forgo 1 attack for the turn and parry instead, gaining a +1 on
all Defense rolls. This bonus does not apply vs. ranged attacks.
Combat Experience: At L3, you receive the Gladiator expert skill for free (see below). No XP roll is required to gain it.
Parry and Counter-strike: Once per combat, when you roll an Explosive Defense roll add the amount by which you surpassed the target number to your next Attack against the same Foe. You may decide to use it after rolling the Defense roll.
Example: A L4 light gladiator performing a Defense against a L5 ogre rolls a 7, for a total Defense roll of 9. The gladiator's next Attack roll vs. the ogre is at +4 (since the Defense roll surpassed the Foe's L by 4 points).
Armor Allowed: Light armor, leafsteel armor. Weapons Allowed: Light hand weapons ONLY. Starting Equipment: Two light weapons, rope, lantern. Starting Wealth: d6gp
Life: 5+L. A L1 light gladiator has 6 Life.
Saves: As a warrior or a rogue. Choose on a case-by-case basis.
Advanced Skills: You can pick skills meant for warriors or rogues except skills related to weapons or armor you can't use, or related to Traps or picking locks.
Scroll use: You can also use scrolls as a L1 wizard.

49

Characters


Magic Item Use: As warriors, including any light weapons.

Expert Skill: Gladiator
You attack and defend at +1 in any fights generated by the Trial of Champi- ons Reaction.

Optional Trait: Pick one or roll on the Table below.



Light Gladiator Traits Table (pick 1 or roll d6)1Blade Mastery. Once per combat, you may reroll a failed Attack roll with a melee weapon.2Quick Feint. Once per adventure, you may forgo one Attack to reduce a Foe's L by -2 against your next attack (the Foe's minimum L will always be 1).3Arena Reflexes. Once per combat encounter, after a successful Defense roll, you may immediately flee from a melee without receiving an attack.4Nimble Step. You have a +Tier bonus on Saves to avoid Traps or area dangers (such as collapsing floors or rolling boulders; any danger or attack type that hits more than 1 PC at a time).5Twin Strike Precision. If both your Attack rolls hit the same Foe in your turn, you deal +1 extra damage.6Opportunist. Once per combat, when you perform a successful Defense roll, you may immediately make a free off-hand Attack against the Foe that missed you. This attack happens in the Foe's turn.



50

Characters
Mushroom Monk
Combat: Mushroom monks add +L to Attack rolls if fighting with nunchaku, bo, sai, un- armed, or with throwing stars. They add +1/2 when using other attack types. They add +1/2
L to Defense rolls.
Rare: A party can have a single mushroom monk.
 Flurry of Blows: You can perform a number of Attacks per turn equal to Tier, if fighting unarmed, with throwing stars, or a nun- chaku. With other weapons, you are limited to 1 attack per turn. Flurry of Blows is not cumulative with skills or spells/items allow- ing multiple attacks per turn.
Martial Arts: Your hands count as light weapons (-1 not -2 on Attack rolls when unarmed). At L5+,
they count as hand weapons (no modifier).
Spores: Tier times per adventure, you may use 1 turn to spray a cloud of spores, causing all living Minor Foes (except fungal creatures and unliv- ing Foes) in the area a -1 modifier to their L, due to poisoning, coughing, and discomfort. Your allies are aware of the ability and protect them- selves with scarfs or holding their breath. Multiple uses of spores during the same encounter do not have cumulative effect.
Immunities: You are immune to poison and sleep effects caused by spores or other mushroom creatures (Foes with the words fungus, fungi, mushroom, fungal in their names or descriptions).
Magic items: A mushroom monk may use any magic items not expressly restricted. It may not use any herbal remedy, potion, or food magic item based on mushroom.
Scroll use: As a L1 caster.
Saves: As a cleric. It always adds +L to Saves to break free from re- straints, chains, ropes, lassos, nets, spider-webs, snares, and other forms of entrapment, if a Save is allowed.
Hyphae: Once per adventure, in the fungal grottoes or a wilderness en- vironment (mountain, forest, jungle), you can let your tendrils (hyphae) crawl into the ground to enter in communion with the roots of plants and the mycelium, a network of tendrils that mushroom creatures use to communicate. This takes 1 turn. Choose one of the following effects:

51

Characters


1) Reduce the chance of Foes surprising the party by 1 (e.g., a Foe with a
3-in-6 chance would have a 2-in-6 chance). This effect lasts until you move to a different environment.
2) Gain 1 Clue.
3) Automatically Save against an illusion, or understand the real nature of a shape-shifted creature, such as knowing that someone is secretly a werewolf.
Tasty: If you die, your allies may turn your body into d6 Food rations. This is considered respectful and desirable by mushroom monks. If eaten, a mushroom monk may not be resurrected.
Self Sustenance: As long as organic matter can be found, the mushroom monk can survive on offal, rotten branches, bits of grass, dead animals, and does not require any food or water.
Armor Allowed: None.
Weapons Allowed: All except firearms.
Starting Equipment: A sash, bo or nunchaku (crushing hand weapon) or 12 throwing stars.
Starting wealth: d6gp.
Life: 4+L. A L1 mushroom monk has 5 Life.
Stealth: +1/2 L.
Advanced Skills: Starting from the Expert Tier (L5), you may learn the fol- lowing with a successful XP roll:
         Fungal Advanced Skills List Parry and Disarm: Against Minor Foes equipped with weapons (in general, this includes all humanoids), when you roll an Explosive Defense result, you disarm the Foe. Reduce the Foe's L by 2 for the remainder of the fight. You must be unarmed or armed with a nunchaku or sai to use this skill.
Butterfly Parry: You spend 1 turn to study a Foe and gains +Tier Defense bonus against the Foe's next attack. On an Explosive De- fense roll, you also disarm the Foe (as Parry and Disarm skill).



52

Characters



Expert Spore Cloud: When using the Spores ability, the modifier for Foes is -Tier, not just -1.
Leap Away: If wielding a quarterstaff (two-handed blunt weapon) or a 10' pole, you may use it to pole-vault out of a combat. Add +L to all Defense rolls performed as you do so. The vault takes you away from melee. It will take 1 full turn for you to join the melee again.
Concentrated Force: Add +Tier to all rolls to bash down doors or destroy inanimate objects.
Stillness of the Mind: Add +Tier to all Saves vs. Magic.
Stunning Blows: When performing Subdual attacks, ignore the -1 mod- ifier.
Heroic Tier skills
Whirlwind of Fury: Once per combat, you get to attack ALL the Mi- nor Foes in the melee. You must "spread" your Attack bonus among all targets, as desired. For example, a PC with a +10 bonus fighting 5 Foes could attack each Foe at +2, or a Foe at +7, one at +2 and one at +1, and so on.
Parry and Counter: Every time you roll an Explosive result on a Defense roll, you may perform a free attack at your normal bonus against that Foe in the Foe's turn, before your turn begins.
Heroic Stillness of the Mind: Add +2 x Tier to all Saves vs. Magic.
Parry and Throw: Every time you roll an Explosion on a Defense roll, you may perform a free attack at your normal Attack bonus against that Foe. This free attack happens in the Foe's turn. It inflicts no damage,
but throws the Foe to the ground, allowing all allies to attack the fallen Foe with a +Tier bonus in their next turn. The fallen Foe will use its next turn to regain its balance. This skill may be used against any humanoid or man-shaped creature. It may not be used against blobs, elementals, octopi, snakes, and creatures without limbs or joints.
Karmic Transferral: If the mushroom monk dies, you may create anoth- er mushroom monk who starts the game with ONE of the previous PC's Expert skills.





53

Characters

Mushroom Monk Traits Table (Pick 1 or roll d6)1Abundant Spores. You may use your spores one additional time per adventure.2High Kicks. Your kick attacks do not suffer the -1 modifier to Attack rolls like your other unarmed strikes. However, if you roll a 1 on a kick attack, you lose your balance and must spend your next turn to stand up.3Poisonous Flesh. Once per combat, if you are bitten by a living Foe, that Foe suffers 1 damage 2 turns after biting. Your body may not be eaten when you die. Anyone doing so suffers an Attack roll equal to your L. Goblins and ogres are immune and may still eat your body.4Fruitful. Once per adventure, your body generates d3 Food rations worth of edible mushrooms.5Slow Regeneration. You may recover 1 Life per adventure, in addi- tion to any Life recovered by healing or resting.6Tough Cap. Your fungal cap is very sturdy and can be used as a shield. You gain a +1 to Defense rolls. If you die, your allies may use your cap to craft a nonmetallic shield.
54


















in tithes to your order.

Characters
Paladin
Combat: A paladin adds +L to Attack rolls.
Prayer: You have L+1 prayer points that you may spend to do the following:
1. Heal 1 Life on yourself or an ally. Any number of points can be spent at a time.
2. Reroll a failed Save.
 3. Summon a steed for one day (not during combat). This works only outdoors. A mounted paladin who is not surprised attacks non-mounted Foes at +1. A Foe is mounted if the description says so (e.g.,
orc boar riders). The steed cannot be sum- moned into the Netherworld and other
demonic planes.
 Restrictions: After completing an adventure, you must pay Lx10gp or all gems and gold found

You will never break off from combat, even if their party flees.
You won't leave an adventure until the mission is completed, e.g., the Final Boss must be slain. If all surviving PCs are at less than 1/2 Life and all healing has been used up, you may agree to withdraw.
Armor Allowed: Shield, light armor, heavy armor.
Weapons Allowed: Any except firearms.
Starting Equipment: Heavy armor, shield, hand weapon. Shield and hand weapon may be traded for a two-handed weapon.
Starting wealth: d6gp.
Life: 6+L. A L1 paladin has 7 Life.
Magic Items: Anything allowed to warriors.
Saves: As a warrior. Automatically succeeds all Fear-based Saves.
Advanced Skills: You can learn the following Expert Skills from Four Against the Abyss: Commanding Presence, Double Attack, Dying Action, Gladiator, Poison Resistance, Protective Incense, Negotiator, Strong Will, Sworn Enemy, Vampire Hunter, Withstand Pain. In addition, you can learn the Divine Smite Expert skill described below.
Divine Smite
Once per adventure, you can declare a Divine Smite before rolling an Attack. A successful hit inflicts 3 damage on a single Major Foe or au-

55

Characters

tomatically kills 3 Minor Foes regardless of their L. Ignore exploding dice for purposes of this skill. The smite also damages Foes hit only by magic.



Paladin Traits Table (pick 1 or roll d6)1Armor Mastery. Reduce damage from a physical attack by 1 while wear- ing heavy armor. This may bring damage to zero. You may use this Trait once per combat.2Mounted Fighter. Gain +Tier bonus to Attack rolls while mounted. This is in addition to the standard +1 for mounted fighting.3Challenge. You may force a Foe to target you instead of allies for the du- ration of the whole combat or until you die. This will work even if this Foe Hates an ally or attacks random targets. In a Trial of Champions Reac- tion, you MUST be the party's champion.4Oathbound. Gain +L bonus on Saves vs. effects that would force you to attack an ally or flee. If the description of the Save already says that pala- dins are unaffected, you may pass this bonus onto an ally.5Shield Wall. If you have a shield and are adjacent to an ally with a shield, you both gain +1 to Defense rolls. You are adjacent to an ally if you are in position 1 of the Marching Order, and the ally is in position 2, or if you are in position 3 and the ally is in position 4.6Encouraging Presence. All allies gain +Tier bonus on Saves vs. Fear, Ter- ror and Madness as long as you lead the Marching Order.
56

Characters
Ranger
Combat: Rangers add +L to all Attack rolls. A ranger armed with 2 melee weapons may at- tack once per weapon adding 1/2L to both rolls,
but these rolls may not explode. The weapons must be of the same type (e.g., 2 swords, slashing hand weapons, or 2 sticks, blunt hand weapons), or a sword/dagger combina- tion (slashing hand weapon +slashing light weapon). When outdoors, a bow-armed ranger may shoot TWICE per turn, adding
 1/2L to each ranged Attack roll. These attacks may not explode. Other abilities allowing multiple attacks per turn may not be used in conjunction with this.



   Magic items: You may use magic items allowed to warriors and a single item limited to druids. Choose the item when it is found. You may not change it later.
Scroll use: You may cast spells from scrolls as a L1 caster. If you find a scroll with a druid spell, you may learn that druid spell with an Xp roll and use it once per adventure. You may learn only a single spell.
Saves: As a warrior. Always add +L to Climbing, Tracking, and Swimming Saves, even if not indicated in the description of the Save.
Armor Allowed: Shield, light armor.
Weapons Allowed: Light weapons, hand weapons, bows, slings. They may not use two-handed melee weapons or firearms.
Starting Equipment: Hand weapon (x2, choose: blunt or slashing), 1 light weapon, 1 bow, d3 Food rations, 1 suit of light armor.
Starting wealth: 2d6gp.
Life: 6+L. A L1 ranger has 7 Life.
Stealth: +L outdoors, +1/2 L indoors.
Advanced Skills: Rangers learns advanced skills from the lists available to warriors, rogues and swashbucklers. They can start learning skills from L3+. They may start learning Survival skills (see below) from L1. Heroic and higher Tier skills may be learned only at the appropriate Tier.

57

Characters

Sworn Enemy: A ranger specializes in hunting a specific Foe. When fight- ing that Foe, you use a higher Tier die for Stealth, Attack and Defense rolls. Chooses a Sworn Enemy at L1, and add others with a successful XP roll each. Possible choices include:

 Kobolds
 Orcs
 Goblins
 Vampires
 Werewolves
 Hyena-Men
 Trolls
 
Ogres
 Chaos monsters
 Catfolk
 Dragons
 Lizardmen
 Serpentfolk
 Mushroom men

Except from the first Sworn Enemy chosen at L1, you must ACTUALLY fight that Foe at least once during your adventures to learn the skill.
Tracking: If the party must spend Clues to find/hunt a specific Foe, a ranger reduces the number of Clues by 1. This is NOT cumulative with other abil- ities with the same effect. Multiple rangers in the party do NOT give any additional bonus.
Boss tracking: With a ranger in the party, you may reroll, once per ad- venture, the roll to determine who is the Final Boss. You may reroll even a successful roll.
Learning from the Environment: Every time you enters a new terrain type, you may use 1 XP roll to learn a Survival Skill appropriate to that area. E.g., a ranger in a jungle can learn Jungle Survival. Environments include:

 Jungle
 Forest
 Desert
 Savanna
 Crag/Mountains
 
Plains
 Volcanic Area
 Frozen wastes, Snow-covered lands
 Sea/Ocean


The Tier die bonus from fighting a sworn enemy and fighting in a known terrain type are cumulative. The maximum Tier die bonus you can get is TWO dice shift.
Example: A L3 ranger with orcs as Sworn Enemies and Forest Survival Skill rolls d10 when fighting orcs in a forest (d6>d8>d10).
New skill: Survival (Terrain type)
When adventuring in an appropriate terrain type, use a higher Tier die for Saves, Stealth, Attack and Defense rolls.
Example: Dara the L3 ranger has Survival Forest. In a forest, she uses d8 for her Attack rolls, Defense rolls, and Saves.
Later, she enters a chaos dungeon. Dara reverts to using her normal d6 Tier die.

58

Characters



In addition, when the party rolls to forage, a PC with the appropriate Sur- vival skill finds 1 additional Food.
This skill is available to rangers, wilderness scouts, conservationist, druids and wood elves. Rangers can learn it from L1, when visiting that terrain type.



Ranger Traits Table (pick one or roll d6)1Deadeye. You have +1 to ranged attacks with bows and crossbows.2Track Master. You may ignore the surprise from Wandering Monsters if you roll a successful Save at +L vs. the Foes' L. The encounter still happens but the party acts first.3Forager. Once per adventure, if the setting allows, you can automat- ically find 4 Rations or enough healing herbs or mushrooms to heal d6 Life (distribute the amount of healing among allies and yourself as desired).4Beast Whisperer. You may alter by 2 the Reaction rolls of wild ani- mals. This affects only Foes with the Animal tag in their description.5Snare Master. Once per adventure, you may automatically disarm an outdoor snare/Trap. You may use this ability AFTER determining the effect of the Trap.6Stealth Master. Add +Tier to your Stealth Saves outdoors.



59

Characters
Rogue
Combat: Rogues add +L to Defense rolls and
+L to Attack rolls vs. outnumbered Minor Foes (i.e., when the PCs outnumber the Foes, for example 4 PCs vs. 3 orcs).
Magic items: Any not forbidden.
Scroll use: As a L1 caster.
Saves: As a rogue. Always add +L to Saves vs. Traps and to lock-pick doors.
Armor Allowed: Light armor.
Weapons Allowed: Light weapons, sling.
Starting Equipment: Light armor, light weapon, rope, lock-picks.
Starting wealth: 3d6gp.
Life: 3+L. A L1 rogue has 4 Life.
Stealth: +L.
Advanced Skills: All skills available to rogues from L5+.

Rogue Traits Table (pick one or roll d6)1Knife Fighter. Gain +Tier on Attack rolls with daggers (Light Slashing weapon) or throwing knives (Light Ranged Slashing weapon).2Evasion. Once per adventure, automatically perform a Save to avoid dam- age or an undesirable effect (e.g., being turned to stone).3Shadow-walker. Gain +Tier to Stealth rolls.4Delicate Touch. Gain +Tier to lock-picking and Saves to disarm Traps.5Street Thug. Gain +1 Life. You may use hand weapons and start with one (choose, slashing - a sword- or blunt - a cudgel).6Backstabber. Your +L bonus to Attack rolls vs. outnumbered Foes applies even against Major Foes.


60


















Saves: As a rogue.
Armor Allowed: None.

Characters
Swashbuckler
Combat: Swashbucklers add 1/2L to Attack and Defense rolls. They can perform 2 Attacks per turn, one with a hand weapon in their main hand and one with a light
weapon in their off-hand.
Panache: A swashbuckler gains Panache points, up to a maximum equal to L, for each Foe the PC kills. Swashbucklers may spend 1 Panache point to increase their next Attack or Defense roll by +1. A maxi-
mum of 1 point may be spent on each Attack or Defense roll.
Magic items: Any not restricted.
Scroll use: As a L1 caster.

Weapons Allowed: Light weapon, hand weapon, sling, firearms.
Starting Equipment: Hand weapon, light hand weapon, plumed cavalier hat or tricorn cap, half-cape.
Starting wealth: 2d6gp.
Life: 4+L. A L1 swashbuckler has 5 Life.
Stealth: +1/2.
Advanced Skills: All skills available to swashbucklers listed in Four Against the Abyss and all skills not explicitly forbidden in Four Against the Forsaken Depths.
Optional Trait: Roll on the Swashbuckler Traits Table below or pick a Trait from it.
61

Characters




Swashbuckler Traits Table (pick one or roll d6)1Flourishing Strike. Once per combat, after a successful Attack, you may immediately make a second off-hand Attack without spending an action.2Daring Escape. Once per adventure, you may disengage from melee without provoking an attack. The Foes are so surprised by your acrobatic escape that an ally gains a +1 to their next Attack roll against a Foe of your choice.3Riposte. Once per combat, if an enemy misses you in melee, you may immediately counterattack with your off-hand weapon. This Attack roll happens in the Foes' turn, before the party's next turn begins.4Lucky Hat. Once per adventure, you may reroll a failed Defense roll at +1. If the reroll is a 1, your plumed/tricorn hat is destroyed. You must buy a replacement for 6gp when you visit a settlement. You may not use Pirate's Luck until you have a new hat. The hat is not magical but may be stolen by Invisible Gremlins.5Taunt. Once per combat, you may mock a Foe to distract them. The target suffers -Tier on its L on its next turn (L will not be reduced below 1). Taunt does not work on Weird Monsters, or on Unliving Foes- but it works on vampires!6Blade Dance. Once per adventure, you may spend any number of panache points to add a +1 bonus per point to your next Attack and Defense rolls. E.g., if you spend 3 points, you will have +3 to your next Attack and your next Defense roll. If the combat ends before you have a chance to perform the roll, the bonus on the next Defense roll is lost (it does not carry over to the next combat).
62

Characters
Warrior
Combat: Warriors add +L on all Attack rolls with melee and ranged weapons.
Magic items: Any not forbidden.
Scroll use: As a L1 caster.
Saves: As a warrior. Armor Allowed: Any Weapons Allowed: Any
 Starting Equipment: Light armor and either shield+hand weapon or two-handed weapon
or bow.
Starting wealth: 2d6gp.
Life: 6+L. A L1 warrior has 7 Life.
Advanced Skills: All skills available to warriors at L5+.
Stealth: No modifier.
Optional Character Trait: Choose or roll on the following Table.


Warrior Traits Table (pick one or roll d6)1Good Shot. Gain +1 to Attack rolls with ranged weapons.2Shield Expert. Once per adventure, if you carry a shield, reduce damage from one attack by 1. This may bring damage to zero.3Power Strike. Once per adventure, one of your attacks inflicts +1 damage. Use this Trait after performing the Attack roll.4Intuitive Team Tactics. Once per combat, give a +1 to a single Defense or Attack roll performed by an ally. You can't use this Trait if the party was surprised.5Tight Guard. Gain +1 to Defense rolls vs. the first attack targeting you in every combat.6Sword/Mace Training. Choose mace or sword (blunt or slashing hand weapon). Add +Tier to Attack rolls with that weapon.

63

Characters
Wizard
Combat: Wizards add +L to spellcasting rolls.
Magic Use: Wizards have L+2 spell slots. Before the adventure, place 1 spell in each slot. You may have multiple copies of the same spell, e.g., with 3 spell slots you may start the
 game with 2x Sleep and 1 Lightning. Slots refresh between adventures. When starting a new adventure, you may always change which spells are in the slots. A single spent slot may be recovered during an adventure when Resting. You know all the 6 wizard ba- sic spells. Spells not on that list may be add- ed to your repertoire by learning them from
scrolls (this burns the scroll) or by spending 3 Clues to reveal the New Spell Secret.
Spell Burning: A wizard without any available slots may use a page from the spellbook as a
                   scroll. Casting the spell removes the spell from the book (the page turns to ashes when the spell is cast). You may not cast the spell again until you spend 1 XP to learn it spell again, or find that spell on a scroll and copy it in the spellbook.
Magic items: Any, unless restricted to a specific class or a weapon/armor forbidden to a wizard.
Scroll use: Wizards add +L to spellcasting rolls when casting from scrolls.
Saves: As a wizard. Always add +L to Saves vs. puzzles and magic.
Armor Allowed: None
Weapons Allowed: Light weapon, sling.
Starting Equipment: Light weapon, spell- book, writing implements.
Starting wealth: 4d6gp.
Life: 2+L. A L1 wizard has 3 Life.
Advanced Skills: All skills available to wiz- ards starting from L5+.



64

Characters


Wizard Traits Table (pick one or roll d6)1Arcane Memory. You have 1 additional spell slot.2Keen Observer. You have +1 on Search rolls.3Spell Efficiency. Once per adventure, you may cast a spell without removing it from your spell slot.4Sygilist. Add +Tier to your spellcasting rolls when casting spells from a scroll or from an inscription.5Scrapper. Gain +1 to Defense rolls. Ignore the -1 on Attack rolls when using a light weapon of your choice (stick or dagger).6Specialist. Choose Lightning, Sleep or Fireball. Add +Tier to your spellcasting roll when casting that spell.
65
