




The right tools at the right moment are essential for survival.
 This is a list of equipment you can buy BEFORE an adventure or when allowed by the rules (for example, when you encounter merchants, the text will tell you what they are selling). Equipment may be resold for half its price. Valuable, magic or rare items have a Resale Value in their description. You may move gp from any PC to another to pay: heroes will help each other with essential purchases that increase the party's chances.


Bow (No Modifier to Attack, 15gp)
A bow is a slashing ranged weapon that requires 2 hands to be
used (this does not mean it is a two-handed weapon). A hero equipped with a bow may shoot once BEFORE the melee. The hero is assumed to have a quiver with enough arrows to last through the whole adventure.
Outdoors, unless surprised, a bow-equipped ranger or elf can shoot TWICE before the melee.




Hand Weapon (No Modifier to Attack, 6gp)
A melee weapon requires one hand to be used. Choose if it is
slashing (sword, axe, scimitar, etc.) or crushing (flail, hammer, mace, war club, etc.)

Light Weapon (-1 to Attack, 5gp)
A light weapon requires one hand to be used. Choose if it
is slashing (dagger, knife) or crushing (stick, club). It has
-1 on Attack rolls. In narrow corridors, its -1 modifier is ignored.




Optional: You may keep track of arrows/shot used. A quiver will hold 12 arrows. A replacement quiver can be bought for 6gp. A PC may carry a maximum of 4 quivers. All arrows used are lost or broken. If an Attack kills multiple Foes, 1 arrow is used per ev- ery Foe slain. For firearms, a bag of shot has enough black pow- der and 12 bullets and cost 20gp. A PC can carry a maximum of 4 bags. If the PC falls into water, the powder cannot be used until the PC dries it during a Rest.

81

Equipment

Sling (-1 to Attack, 4gp)
A sling is a crushing ranged weapon that requires 2 hands to
be used (this does not mean it is a two-handed weapon). A PC equipped with a sling may shoot once BEFORE the melee. The PC carries enough slingstones to last through the whole adventure. In open plains and deserts, unless surprised, a sling-equipped PC can shoot TWICE before the melee begins.




Crossbow (+1 to Attack, 15gp)
A crossbow is a slashing ranged weapon that requires 2 hands to
be used (this does not mean it is a two-handed weapon). A PC with a crossbow may shoot once BEFORE the melee. The PC has enough bolts to last through the whole adventure. Crossbows have
+1 on Attack rolls. After shooting 1 bolt, the user must spend 1 turn to reload the crossbow.





Two-Handed Weapon (+1 to Attack, 15gp)
This melee weapon requires two hands to be used. It
can be slashing (two-handed sword, battle axe, hal- berd, etc.) or crushing (maul, two-handed hammer, two-handed mace, etc.) It has +1 to Attack rolls but loses this bonus, and attacks at a net-1, in narrow corridors.




Shield (+1 to Defense, 5gp)
A shield requires one hand to be used. It gives a +1 to
the wielder's Defense rolls. As it may break in combat, PCs may carry a replacement on their back. Wielding a shield gives a -1 to Stealth Saves.





82

Equipment


Light Armor (+1 to Defense, 10gp)
Light armor is considered non-metallic. It gives a +1
to the wearer's Defense rolls. No modifier to Stealth.
-1 to Swimming Saves.




Heavy Armor (+2 to Defense, 30gp)
Heavy armor is considered metallic. It gives a +2 to
the wearer's Defense rolls, -1 to Stealth Saves, -2 to Swimming and Climbing Saves.




Lantern (Light source, 4gp)
Carrying a lantern requires a hand or a lantern hook on a shield
(see lantern hook, below). Without a source of light, PCs are at
-2 on all Attack, Defense and Save rolls, and may not perform Search rolls or use ranged attacks. A lantern comes with enough oil to last until the end of the adventure.



Torch (Light source, 1gp/dozen)
Carrying a torch requires a hand. This is a source of light. It can
be used in melee as a light crushing weapon, but on a roll of 1 it is extinguished. A torch lasts for 6 rooms/1 hour. 1gp buys a
bundle of 12 torches. Against flammable targets like mummies, it Attacks at +2 instead of -1.





Holy Water (30gp/vial)
A vial of Holy water can be thrown as an action. This doesn't
require a free hand. It causes automatic damage to undead and demons. Normal damage is 1, but some Foes take more damage. You may buy a maximum of 1 vial per PC per adventure.

83

Equipment

Rope (4gp)
A rope gives +1 to Climbing Saves and may be used to
bind subdued Foes.



Bandage (Heals 1 Life, 5gp)
Each PC can use 1 Bandage per adventure. Applying 1 Ban-
dage heals 1 Life. Bandages may not be applied in combat. Their healing is cumulative with other sources of healing.




Healing Potion (Heals all damage, 100gp)
Drinking a healing potion heals all damage suffered by a PC. No
PC may drink more than 1 healing potion per adventure. Drink- ing is a free action and may be done during combat.



Food Rations (Food for 1 person for 1 day, 1gp)
Food rations are normally used only in outdoor ad-
ventures, but they are handy in dungeons to bribe ravenous creatures. A PC may carry a maximum of 10 Rations. PCs lose 1 Life per every day without food. 1 Ration is enough for 1 person per 1 day.




Lantern Hook (2gp)
A lantern hook lets a PC hang a lantern on a shield, freeing one
hand. The PC may use 1 action to detach the lantern from the shield. If the shield is destroyed, roll a 3-in-6 chance that the lantern is also destroyed. If it is not destroyed, it drops on the floor.





84



10' Pole (2gp)

Equipment

The pole requires 2 hands to use. Only a single PC can carry a pole. It is as a crushing light weapon in the hands of PCs limited to light weapons, a crushing hand weapon in the hands of PCs limited to hand weapons, and a crushing two-handed weapon in the hands of PCs with no restrictions. Wielding a pole gives the PC a +1 to all Saves vs. Traps except Traps that hit the whole party or a random target. The PC may reroll a Search result of
2-4.


Flask of Flammable Oil (10gp)
Each PC can carry a maximum of 1 flask. The PC may spend 1
turn to throw the flask at a Foe. That Foe becomes Flammable. Torches and fire-based spells now hit that Foe at +2. All scrolls in the Foe's loot are destroyed if the Foe takes damage from any fire-based attack.




Scroll of Blessing (Casts 1 Blessing, 100gp)
Reading this scroll takes 1 turn. It allows the PC to cast 1
Blessing.





Resurrection Ritual (1000gp, service)
This ritual must be performed at a local temple, between
adventures. You must bring a dead PC's body to the temple and pay 1000gp. Roll d6. If the result is equal to or lower than the PC's L, the PC comes back to life with full health (all afflictions, diseases, curses, Madness etc. are re- moved). If the roll fails, the PC is lost forever. L6+ PCs are automatically resurrected. Certain causes of death (being disintegrated, dissolved in acid, sent to other dimensions or devoured) will prevent Resurrection.



Bag of Nails (4gp)
One use. Allows to secure a door while Resting.


85

Equipment
Silvering (20 or 40gp, service)
Silvering is the process of silver-coating a metallic, slashing weapon. Silvered
weapons attack were-creatures at +1. Between adventures, you can spend 20gp to silver a light weapon, a quiver of arrows or a hand weapon, and 40gp to silver a two-handed weapon.



Amulet (15gp, magic item)
Each PC can wear a single amulet. An amulet gives the
wearer 1 Luck point. It works like the halfling's Luck. When the Luck point is used, the amulet loses its powers and must be discarded.




Talisman (+1 to a Save; 10gp, magic item)
Each PC can wear a maximum of 1 talisman. It gives the
wearer +1 to a single Save. Choose when to use the bonus, BEFORE rolling. When the bonus is used, the talisman loses its powers and must be discarded.






Herbal Tonic (20gp, herbal remedy)
This herbal remedy may be used to remove paralysis, such as that
caused by ghouls. It takes 1 turn to give the tonic to a paralyzed PC. You can do so during combat. The tonic works immediately.







Scroll Tube (4gp)
This leather case protects a scroll, allowing you
to ignore any event that destroys a scroll. You need a separate tube for each scroll.

86

Equipment

Gilding (50gp)
Gilding is the process of gold-coating a metallic weapon. Gilded weapons at-
tack elementals at +2.



Handgun (30gp)
Ranged slashing weapon. Add +2 to Attack rolls. On a roll of 1,
the firearm explodes, dealing 1 damage to its user and becomes unusable for the rest of the adventure or until repaired by a gnome (spending 1 gadget point). Reloading it takes 2 turns.
After every combat in which a firearm is used, increase the next roll for Wandering Monsters by 1 (e.g., a 2-in-6 chance instead of a 1-in-6 chance).




Black Powder Rifle (90gp)
Ranged slashing weapon. Add +3 to Attack rolls (total modifier
+3). On a roll of 1, the firearm explodes, dealing 1 damage to its user and becomes unusable for the rest of the adventure or
until repaired by a gnome (spending 2 gadget points). Reloading it takes 2 turns. After every combat in which a firearm is used, increase the chance of Wandering Monsters by 1 (e.g., a 2-in-6 chance instead of a 1-in-6 chance).




Gremlin Repellant (5gp/dose, herbal remedy)
This herbal remedy may be smeared on items before the adven-
ture. Invisible gremlins will not steal an item coated in repel- lant. A dose gremlin-proofs 1 item. It wears off at the end of the adventure.


Wolfsbane (10gp/bunch, herbal remedy)
A bunch of these flowers thrown at a were-creature forces
the Foe to roll Morale. It takes 1 turn to throw the bunch. No Attack roll is needed. You may try as many times as desired. Thrown bunches are lost.

87

Equipment

Good Lock-picks (+1 to lock-picking Saves, 25gp)
Good lock-picks give +1 to all Saves to open locked doors.




Throwing Star (-1 to Attack rolls, 2gp)
Throwing stars are light ranged slashing weapons (-1 on
Attack rolls). They never inflict more than 1 damage, even if the Attack explodes. You can throw 2 stars per turn, performing 2 attacks at the same target or at 2 different targets. You may wait to see the result of the first Attack before deciding the target of the second.






Stake (-1 to Attack rolls, 6gp)
Against normal targets, these can be used as non-metallic
light weapons (-1 on Attack). Against vampires, they count as hand weapons (no Attack roll modifier). Stakes can be used by any PC. If you dip the tip into a vial of holy water, all attacks hitting a vampire deal +1 damage. This uses a vial of Holy Water.




Crowbar (+1 to bash down doors, 10gp)
A crowbar can be used as a crushing light weapon (-1 to Attack
rolls). It gives +1 to all attempts to bash doors.




Berserker's Mushroom (+1 to Attack rolls, herbal remedy, 15gp)
Swallow this mushroom as a free action to gain +1 to melee Attack
rolls until the end of an encounter. Lose 1 Life at the end of the en- counter.


88
