Random Dungeons
he 4AD core play experience is random dungeons. Your mis- sion is simple: slay a Final Boss, take its Treasure and return home. You roll d66 on a list of tile shapes, creating your dungeon one tile at a time, then roll 2d6 on the Tile Content Table to determine what is in the tile. Then you roll on sub- tables detailing encounters, special events, and so on. You,
the player, draw a map, react to the situations that come up and manage your finite resources (spells, abilities, Life), keeping track of any rewards (XP rolls, Treasure, magic items, Clues, etc.) and wounds or impairments inflicted upon your PCs.
A random dungeon is composed of TILES. A tile is the map of a room or corridor. A tile one square wide is a corridor. A tile 2+ squares wide is a room. Corridors are more likely to be empty; being in a corridor affects who can fight.
Start by rolling 1d6 on the First Room list. Do not roll content for it. Draw the tile at the bottom of your grid, then choose a door or exit and roll d66 for a new tile shape. Draw the new tile on your map and roll for its content as the party enters it.
Map Art: Your map does not need to be an artistic masterpiece. As long as you can draw rectangles, you'll be fine. You can embellish it, inking it with fineliners pens, shading it with markers or pencils, or drawing it digitally on a tablet or computer.
Mapping: A typical random dungeon is mapped on a grid of 20x28 squares. It can be slightly bigger or smaller with no effect on play (making it too big will kill your party- the larger the dungeon, the more Foes you encounter). Draw rooms and corridors connecting them to the previous tile. All tile shapes have openings or doors to be used as connectors. You may rotate, mirror or truncate a tile if you do not have space on the grid. The size of tiles is irrelevant.
Tiles may extend up to the edge of the paper. If a tile meets the end of the paper, it ends there- truncate the part that doesn't fit. Ignore any door or opening connecting with the edge of the paper: that's a dead end. If your roll selects a tile that won't fit, for example because it would intersect with another tile, truncate it. It still counts as a room or corridor, as per the roll, and you still roll for its content, even if it' is only one square. Stretch a corridor by 1-2 squares if it makes it easier to connect it.

Retracing Your Steps
When you go back through an already visited tile, roll d6. On a 1, Wander- ing Monsters attack! Roll on the Wandering Monsters Table. They always attack first, targeting the PCs at the rear of your Marching Order. After a turn, in a room, the party will spread out and protect its weaker members, so you may distribute the attacks of Wandering Monsters as normal.
If you re-enter a tile occupied by a Foe you bribed, Wandering Monsters won't appear there.
104

Make a note of anything you gave the Foe; you may always change your mind later, and return there to attack to recover your Treasure.

The Final Boss
Your mission is to slay the dungeon's Final Boss. Each time you meet a Major Foe, roll d6, and add +1 for every Major Foe encountered so far in the adven- ture (including the Invisible Gremlins). If you roll 6+, that Major Foe is the Final Boss. Keep a tally of Major Foes encountered on your play sheet.
If you run out of space on the grid, you meet the Final Boss in the last tile. The Final Boss is powerful: add +1 Life, +1 attack, and its Reaction is Always fight to the death. Its gp Treasure is tripled, or increased to 100gp, whichev- er is best for you. If it has 1 magic item, you will find 2 magic items instead. Killing the Final Boss and moving out of the dungeon ends the adventure, but if you have a Quest going on, you may wish to continue until you com- plete the dungeon or the quest, whatever happens first. Killing the Final Boss and taking its loot is not enough. You have to make it out of the dun- geon alive!
Time or Tile Limit: You may also play with a time limit ("I will play for 45 minutes then meet the Final Boss and play for how long it takes to exit the dun- geon after that") or with a tile limit ("I will play 15 tiles then, if I didn't encoun- ter it already, I will automatically encounter the Final Boss").
Splitting the Party
In certain circumstances, you may want to split the party. For example, you may leave a PC to guard the body of a fallen comrade, or send a single PC to complete a Quest. In these cases, every time you roll Wandering Monsters for the main party, roll a 1-in-6 chance of Wandering Monsters appearing also for the PCs you left behind.

Fallen Heroes
A PC losing their last Life slumps to the ground, dead. If a combat is still go- ing on, an ally may still access any scroll, potion, vial of holy water, weapon, shield, or magic item on the dead PC's body, spending 1 turn to pick it up. If the party withdraws or flees, a PC may carry the body of the fallen hero, but that PC won't be able to make Defense rolls and will be automatically hit by any attack. A PC carrying a dead friend will automatically be in position 3 or
4. You may carry a dead friend out of the dungeon by moving to the en- trance room, leave the body in a safe place out of the dungeon, redistribute the dead PC's equipment, and continue the adventure. If you leave any items on your comrade's body, roll a 5-in-6 chance that they will be stolen. Resurrection: You may carry a dead PC home to give them a proper burial or spend 1000gp for a Resurrection Ritual (see Equipment list). If it fails, the money is still spent, but the PC is irremediably lost. Such is the will of the Gods! Replace the dead adventurer with a new, L1 PC.


105

Characters Turned to Stone
Certain Foes can paralyze or turn to stone their victims. If all the PCs are turned to stone, the adventure is over. If some survive, they may help the petrified ones. A PC's clothing and equipment, including magic items and carried Treasure, turns to stone too, and may not be picked up until the stone-turning magic is
removed. If the PC carried a lantern, the PC dropped it to the floor as their fingers stiffened.
Petrified PCs can be restored with a Blessing. A dead PC carried by an ally who is petrified turns to stone until the PC carrying them is restored.
The dead PC is still dead when the stone-turning is dispelled.
If no Blessing is available, you may abandon the PC (maybe planning a rescue mission later) or carry them out of the dungeon. 2 PCs are re- quired to carry a petrified PC. Be- cause of the noise caused by dragging it on the floor, the chance of encoun- tering Wandering Monsters increases to 2-in-6 while doing so. You may then purchase a Blessing scroll from
a temple.
Rescue Mission: Add a L1 cleric to the party, replacing one of the petri-
fied PCs, reach the room where the petrified PCs were left, use the cleric's Blessing to restore them, and then move out of the dungeon. The cleric must be paid 100gp, plus 100gp per Blessing cast. The cleric will fight and may be assigned loot and XP rolls as normal during the rescue mission.

106

Searching Tiles
Whenever you generate an empty tile, maybe it just looks empty... You may Search it rolling on the Table below. A tile may be searched only once. Mark it with an "S" when you Search it. In corridors, roll at -1.

Search Table (d6)RollResult0-1Wandering Monsters attack!2-4Tile is really empty. Nothing to see here.5-6You found something. Choose: 1) A hidden treasure, 2) a secret door, 3) a secret passage, 4) 1 Clue.A halfling PC may spend 1 Luck to reroll once.Wandering Monsters
Wandering Monsters are security guards who roam about via secret pas- sages or hide in the shadows until foolhardy adventurers pass by. When the rules call for them, roll d6 to see who comes:

Wandering Monsters Table (d6)RollResult1-2Roll on the Vermin Table appropriate to your environment.3-4Roll on the Minions Table appropriate to your environment.5Roll on the Weird Monsters Table appropriate to your environment.6Roll on the Boss Monsters Table appropriate to your environment.Reroll Foes that are events (e.g., invisible gremlins) or whose description states they are never encountered as Wandering Monsters (e.g. dragon).Published adventures have their own Wandering Monsters Tables.
Wandering monsters sneak on the party and automatically attack first on the first turn of combat. PCs may not use their shield bonus on their first Defense roll against Wandering Monsters.





107

If encountered in a corridor, Wandering Monsters will attack the 2 rear- most PCs. If encountered in a room, and there are enough Foes to attack all PCs, all PCs will be attacked by at least 1 Foe, with extra attacks assigned to Hated character first, and then to the PCs with the lowest current Life Point total (roll randomly if more PCs have the same Life). Wandering Monsters roll Morale when the situation calls for it.

Secret Door
You found a secret door! Draw a door on one side of the current tile, and roll another random tile connected with it. You may peek in the tile and determine its content BEFORE stepping into it, and you may leave it alone if it seems too dangerous. If you find any Treasure behind a secret door, its gp value is DOUBLED. If you enter, any Foes will be surprised. If you attack immediately, reduce their L by 1 (to a minimum of 1) in the first turn of combat. In addition, when you find a secret door, roll a d6. On a 6, it is a safe shortcut out of the dungeon. A halfling may use 1 Luck to reroll this
1-in-6 chance. You can exit the dungeon through this tile. Don't roll for Wandering Monsters when you go through the safe exit.

Secret Passage
You find a passage leading to a different environment of your choice. If you are in a dungeon, you may move to the fungal grottoes or the caverns, or vice versa. To represent the different environment, use a differently-colored pencil or marker to draw your tiles (e.g., black for dungeons, green for fun- gal grottoes, brown for caverns).

Hidden Treasure
A loose brick or floorboard hides (2d6+HCL) x (2d6+HCL) gp. Before deter- mining the amount, roll on the Table below:
Hidden Treasure Complication Table (d6)RollResult1-2An alarm goes off, attracting Wandering Monsters!3-5The loot is protected by a Trap. A rogue may try to disarm it with a Save vs. HCL+1. If there's no rogue, a random PC must Save vs. HCL+1, losing 1 Life on a failure and 2 Life on a roll of 1.6The treasure is protected by a ghost. A cleric may ban the ghost with a successful Save vs. HCL. If the Save fails or there's no cleric, all PC lose 1 Life, then the ghost disappears.Halflings may spend 1 Luck to reroll on this Table.




Clues
A PC can find 1 Clue with a successful Search roll. Clues are an abstract resource representing hidden information. Write it down on the play sheet. When you have 3 Clues, you may spend them to reveal a Secret (see Secrets).Clues accumulate over different adventures. Keep them until
you want to spend them. Clues are discovered by a specific PC, but the PC shares the information with allies. If the PC dies, transfer the Clues to another character.

Doors (Optional)
You may assume that all doors are unlocked and safe, or roll 2d6 on the Door Table below when you go through a door.

Door Table (2d6)RollResult2The door is magically sealed. It cannot be bashed. It can be opened by a spellcaster with a successful spellcasting roll vs. the door's L. Only one attempt possible. On a roll of 1, choose: the caster takes 2 damage from magic feedback or Wandering Monsters arrive. Add +1 to any Treasure roll performed in the tile behind this door.3Iron door. Roll HCL+d6 for its L. It cannot be bashed but can be lock- picked or destroyed with a Lightning or Fireball spell. Add +1 to any Treasure roll performed in the tile behind this door.4Illusionary door. The door is protected by an illusion that makes it invis- ible. The only way to open it is to spend 3 Clues or to have an illusionist perform a successful spellcasting roll vs. HCL. One attempt per illusion- ist in the party is possible.5-6Locked door, HCL+d6.7-10Unlocked Door. No special rules.11Trap. The door is unlocked but opening it triggers a HCL+d6 trap. A rogue may try to disarm the trap. If the attempt fails, the rogue must Save vs. the trap's L or take 1 damage.12Lever Door. This door cannot be bashed or lock-picked, but it may be opened by spending 1 Clue or 1 Gadget point from a gnome's pool. If you withdraw through this door, Foes cannot strike at the party as you flee.Halflings may spend 1 Luck to reroll on this Table.
When a door is locked, mark it on your map. The door's L determines how difficult it is to open it. You may bash it down with brute force or a spell, or a rogue may try to pick the lock.


109

Bashing: Choose a PC to Save vs. the door's L. Barbar- ians and warriors add +L. On a success, the door opens. If you fail, you may try again immediately. You may try as many times as you want, but if you roll a 1 on any attempt, the noise attracts Wandering Monsters. A wizard may also destroy a door with a Lightning Bolt or a Fireball. This is automatic. A destroyed door may not be nailed shut (see Resting, below).
Lock-picking: Rogues, assassins, kuklas and gnomes may attempt to lock-pick a door with a Save vs. the door's L. If it succeeds, the door is open. If it fails, the PC is unable to open the door, and it must be bashed down.

Traps
When you find a Trap, roll on the Traps Table to determine its nature. A rogue in position 1 or 2 of the Marching Order could detect and disarm a Trap before it goes off. The rogue rolls a Save vs. the trap's L, adding +L. If successful, the Trap is neutralized. If failed, the Trap goes off. A rogue targeted by a Trap still gets a chance to avoid its effect as per the trap's description.

Lantern
Dungeons are dark. At least a PC must carry a source of light in a hand. If the PC is killed, paralyzed, or turned to stone, the lantern falls to the ground and another PC must pick it up, using 1 turn to do so. Without light, PCs have -2 on Attack rolls, Defense rolls, and Saves, may not use ranged weapons or perform Search rolls.

Hands
PCs have two hands they can use. A PC holding a two-handed melee weap- on, a musket or a bow cannot hold a shield or a lantern. A spellcaster needs one free hand to cast spells (a hand holding a magic wand or a holy symbol can still be used to cast a spell). Carrying a weapon in each hand does not confer any advantage, unless the PC has a double attack ability like rang- ers, light gladiators, and swashbucklers. A PC may strap a shield on their back to have a free hand, but gains no protection from a carried shield.
Equipping a shield takes 1 turn.
Holy Water
Readying and throwing a vial of holy water requires 1 turn. No Attack roll is required. The splash automatically inflicts damage on undead and demon Foes. The vial is used up in the attack.



110

Potions
Drinking a potion is a free action, and can be done at any moment. Effects are immediate. You may drink it as a reaction to an event, e.g., drinking an antidote when poisoned. Read the description of the potion for details.

Exchanging Equipment
In any situation except during a combat you may move equipment from a PC to another. During combat, two PCs wanting to exchange hand-held
equipment must both spend 1 turn doing so. Armor may be exchanged only if the PCs are of the same build (humanoid PCs are all of the same build, but dwarves, elves, kuklas, fairies, lutins, halflings are not, so a dwarf may wear only armor that belonged to another dwarf). Spells and prayers are NOT equipment and cannot be exchanged. You can exchange scrolls.

Looting Dead Allies
It is possible to pick up equipment from dead/paralyzed allies, but not from those turned to stone. Spells and prayers are NOT equipment and cannot be picked up, but you can pick up scrolls.

Dropping Equipment
A PC may drop unwanted items at any moment. Dropping a hand-held item takes no time. Dropping an item from your backpack requires 1 turn. Dropped items remain on the floor. If the party moves out of the tile and returns later, the items will be gone.

The Environments
There are three different environments: dungeons fungal grottoes, and cav- erns. You always start in a dungeon, but you can find a secret passage lead- ing to another environment through certain Table results. When you enter a different environment, you use the same Tile Content Table and shapes, but that environment's Tables for Foes and special Treasure.
Example: You enter the fungal grottoes and encounter Minions. You roll on the Fungal Grottoes Minions Table.

111

Cavern Rules
Openings in caverns never have doors (this affects Resting as there's no door to nail shut). When you enter a Cavern tile, roll d6. On a 1-2, there's a special feature. Roll on the following Table:

Stalactites: Mark stalactites on your map with small triangles with the tips pointing down. During combat, an explosive Attack roll with a
two-handed weapon has a 3-in-6 chance of causing a stalactite to fall. Roll d6: 1-3 it falls on a random PC, 4-6 it falls on a random Foe. The PC can avoid the stalactite with a successful Defense roll vs. HCL. If the Defense roll fails, the hero loses 1 Life. If the stalactite falls on a Foe, roll an Attack against that Foe with a bonus equal to HCL. On a success, the stalactite deals 1 damage to that Foe. The stalactite's Attack roll may explode (this represents multiple stalactites falling).
Stalagmites: Mark stalagmites on the tile with small triangles with tips pointing up. Stalagmites hinder movement. PCs can't explode Attack rolls in tiles with stalagmites.
Boulders: The tile is filled with boulders. Mark them on the map with black circles. PCs have +1 to Defense rolls vs. ranged attacks and -1 to Attack rolls with ranged weapons. Foes with a chance of surprise increase this chance by 1. PCs have +1 to Stealth Saves.
Echo: The shape of some rooms creates an echo effect that amplifies sounds. In tiles with Echo, PCs have -1 to Stealth Saves. Encounters with Wandering Monsters have a 2-in-6 (not 1-in-6) chance of occurring here. Spells and prayers cast have a chance of "echoing". Every time a PC casts a spell or prayer, roll 1d6. On a 6, the PC can IMMEDIATELY cast the same spell a second time, for free, either on the same or on a different target. Mark an Echo on the tile with the letter E.
Water Pools: A water pool may either have beneficial effects or be contam- inated. Draw it on the tile with a blue marker. Whenever a PC dips into it, roll on the Water Pool Table below.


112


Water Pool Table (roll d6)1Contaminated Water. The PC suffers -1 to all Saves until the end of the adventure or until Healing or Blessing is cast on the PC. The effects of multiple contaminations are NOT cumulative.2-4No effect.5-6Water refreshes the PC and allows wounds to be cleansed. The PC heals 1 Life. Each PC can enjoy this effect only once per adventure.
Searching in Caverns
The Search roll in caverns is similar to the one in dungeons. You may roll d6 if the tile is generated as Empty. A result of 1 attracts Wandering Mon- sters. A 2-4 has no effect - the tile is empty. A 5-6 allows the PC to find
1 Clue or to Listen. If you Listen, choose an opening in the tile. Roll the content of the tile connected to that opening BEFORE entering it. If your party includes an elf, ranger, rogue or other class Saving as a rogue, a halfling or a shadow, count rolls of 4 as a 5 for purposes of Listening only.

Fungal Grottoes Rules
Fungal grottoes are slippery. All PCs (except rangers, rogues, acrobats, halflings, and mushroom monks) have -1 on their Defense rolls when fleeing.
Fungal grotto tiles do not have doors. A door on the tile is just a large mushroom that blocks the way (L1 for bashing purposes).
Fungal Grottoes have their own Tables for Special Events, Foes and Traps.
Searching in Fungal Grottoes
The Search roll in a fungal grotto tile is similar to the one in dungeons. You may roll d6 if the tile is generated as Empty. A result of 1 attracts Wandering Monsters. A 2-4 has no effect - the tile is empty. A 5-6 allows the PC to find 1 Clue or to roll on the Rare Mushroom Table. Mushroom monks and halflings count a roll of 4 as a 5.

Madness
Due to shock or contact with the energies of Chaos, PCs could gain Mad- ness points during their adventures. Most of the times, a Save is allowed to avoid Madness. A PC with 1 or more Madness points becomes paranoid. You may no longer exchange equipment between that PC and the oth- ers. If at any moment a PC's Madness score is higher than the PC's L, the PC goes insane and runs away in a dark corridor, cackling madly, and is never seen again.
Wizards, thanks to their occult studies, will not go insane until they have L+1 Madness points.

113

PCs of L1 to 4 can opt to take 2 damage instead of gaining 1 Madness.
As soon as they exit the dungeon, all PCs heal 1 Mad- ness, as long as the party has defeated at least 1 Major Foe. You may NOT exit and re-enter a dungeon multiple times in to heal more Madness, only 1 point is healed. You can use a Blessing to heal 1 Madness.
There are other ways of recov- ering from Madness. You'll dis- cover them while adventuring.

Resting
Once per adventure, the party can Rest. The PCs sit down, grab some food, clean their wounds, meditate, write notes in their spellbooks, etc. You may rest in a room that has been cleared of Foes. Any ad-
jacent rooms or corridors must also have been explored and cleared. The room must have doors which can be nailed shut. It takes one bag of nails for each door. These cost 4gp a bag. Each bag is a one use item.
Resting in a dungeon is not like sleeping at home or in a safe place, so only a limited recovery is possible. During rest, a PC can recover 1 Life or recover 1 spent ability, such as a spell, a prayer, an acrobat's Trick point, an halfling's Luck point, a barbarian's rage attack, etc. However, you must make a 1-in-6 Wandering Monsters roll when resting. Foes will appear behind a random door. If you have nailed the door shut, they will force
it open, which will alert the party. You will get the first attack even if the Foe has a natural ability to surprise. If you did not nail the door shut, Wandering Monsters attack first. Wandering Monsters do not cancel the effect of resting and they appear AFTER the PCs have recovered.








114

Animal Companions
The following animal companions are available. An animal companion cannot be of higher level than its master. No PC can have more than 1 animal companion in addition to a mount. Purely decorative animals that do not fight or have game effects (e.g. mice, parrots) don't count. Ani- mals cannot open or bash doors, read scrolls, use magic items, or interact with tile content except through combat. They never gain Madness. Only mounts can carry equipment. Use your common sense!
Animals fight rolling dice like PCs. They have Attack and Defense modifiers they add to their rolls. Except for warhounds, you don't have to make your pets participate in combat if you don't want to.
Hawk: L1, 1 Life, Attack -1, Defense +2. Hawks give the party +1 to orien- tation Saves. A party with one or more hawks reduces by 1 the chance of being surprised, but only outdoors. This bonus stacks with those of war- hounds. They can't attack in corridors. Cost: 20gp.
Owl: L1, 1 Life, Attack -1, Defense +2. Owls can either attack at -1 or give
+1 to their master's spellcasting rolls. Owls kill d6 rats or rat-like monsters (Vermin only), instead of performing their normal attack. They can't at- tack in corridors. Cost: 20gp.
Peacock: L0, 1 Life, Attack -2, Defense +0, Morale -2. Peacocks give their owner a +1 bonus at wooing and seduction Saves. They can't attack in cor- ridors. Cost: 10gp.
Warhound: L1, 2 Life, Attack +1, Defense +0, Morale +1. Dogs are loyal: each time their master is hit in combat, they will take the hit on them- selves on a d6 roll of 5-6 (the master has no choice in this). A party with one or more hounds reduces by 1-in-6 the chance of being surprised. This bonus stacks with those of hawks. Warhounds always stand beside their master in Marching Order. Custom-made light armor for a dog (giving +1 to its Defense rolls) costs 50gp. Only warhounds and wolves can wear it. Cost: 20gp.
Wildcat: L1, 2 Life, Attack +0, Defense +1. Wildcats automatically kill d6 rats or rat-like Foes (Vermin only) instead of performing their normal attack. Against other Foes, wildcats will capriciously refuse to fight on a d6 roll of 1. Cost: 20gp.
Warhorse: L2, 3 Life, 1 attack, Attack +1, Defense +1. They CAN be used for mounted combat outdoors (e.g. in woodlands) and provide a +1 Attack bo- nus to the rider in position 1 of the Marching Order. An armorer can craft light or heavy armor for a horse (barding) at 10 times the normal cost.
Cost: 30gp.
Crow: L1, 1 Life, Attack +0, Defense +0. Grants +1 to Saves to disarm Traps or solve puzzles. Bonuses from multiple crows do not stack. Cost: 15gp.


115

Experience

Experience
Experience
xperience is a measure of the character's growth. It is repre- sented by XP rolls. When a PC performs an XP roll, you roll d6, trying to roll higher than the PC's current L. If you roll
a success (a 6 is always a success in this case), the PC gains 1 L.
XP rolls may also be used to learn Expert skills (only for L5+ PCs).
When a PC's levels up, the PC's current and maximum Life points increase by 1, and all the advantages associated with Level also increase (e.g., a warrior's +L bonus to Attack rolls, a wizard's spell slots, etc.). Leveling up happens DURING the adventure and its effects are immediate.
For example, a wizard gaining 1 L also gains 1 spell slot. The PC was studying and preparing that spell, and enough magical knowledge has been reached. Add a spell from those available for the PC.
You may assign an XP roll to any PC, but not to a PC that has just leveled up, unless that PC is the only survivor (i.e., you cannot select a different PC because they are all dead or turned to stone).
Normally XPs are used immediately. You store them only for switching the whole party to a higher Tier.
Several XP systems are described below. The first one is the default one, but all are official. Choose the one that fits your style of play.

XP, Classical System
You gain 1 XP by defeating 10 Minor Foe encounters (keep track of the number of encounters, the number of Foes in each encounter is irrele- vant). You gain 1 XP by revealing a Secret (this requires finding 3 Clues). You gain 1 XP by defeating a Major Foe. You gain 1 additional XP for de- feating a dungeon's Final Boss.
Some players find this system too fast. If you enjoy long campaigns with the same PCs, use one of the others, or rule that no PC may gain more than 1 Level per adventure.

XP, Slow and Sure System
Under this system, do not roll for XP. Just level up a single PC at the end of any successful adventure. As long as you complete the main goal of the adventure, one of your surviving PCs gains 1 Level. This system does away with book-keeping and gives you more control over your party's growth.




117

Experience

XP, Old School System
Under this system, you do not use XP rolls but keep a growing XP tally and you spend them to level up. The XP numbers will be much higher. You keep track of XP adding the overall levels of Foes defeated (for example, if you defeat 10 L3 Minions, you gain 3x10= 30 XP). Halve this, rounding down, if the Foes are Vermin. For Major Foes, use their L x10, +5 per Life point (so, if you defeat a L6 Foe with 8 Life, you gain 60+40= 100 XP). In addition, you gain 1 XP per every gp of Treasure collected (use resale value for magic and other unusual items).
You spend (Tier+2) x100 XP to level up a hero or to gain a skill. E.g., level- ing up a L5 hero (Tier 2) costs 400 XP.
You may not level up the same PC twice in a row, unless the PC is the only survivor. Whenever the adventure gives you an XP roll for some action not connected with defeating Foes or collecting Treasure, gain Tierx100 xp.
This system requires more book-keeping but feels more old school.
XP, Slower Advancement System
Keep the XP earning system the same as the Classical System above, but change the advancement to the following:
Store the XP. Spending a number of XP equal to level you are trying to advance to allows the PC to try an XP roll.
Example: A L3 PC wanting to advance to L4 must spend 4 XP and perform a successful XP roll to become L4.
For each additional XP spent above the amount required, the PC receives a +1 to the XP roll. Using this system, there's no XP for Tier advancement, but the PC must spend gp to cover training expenses (Tier 2 = 500gp; Tier 3 = 1000gp; Tier 4=2500gp; Tier 5=5000gp).
To learn advanced skills/spells, PCs must spend XP equal to their current L and must have attained the minimum Level/Tier required for that skill. The PC must also spend (100xL)gp for training expenses and guild fees.

118

Milestones

Milestones

Milestone is s short term goal assigned to a PC. Upon comple- tion of the Milestone, the PC receives a benefit. The same Mile- stone may be given to multiple PCs. As soon as the Milestone is accomplished in the campaign, the PC gains the benefit and may choose another Milestone. Milestones are entirely option- al. Each PC may take a Milestone only once. Most Milestones
ask you to keep track of certain actions. Draw a box on your play sheet with the name of the Milestone and pencil in a checkmark every time that action is accomplished. You may choose Milestones freely, at any point of the PC's career.
Goblinslayer: As soon as the PC slays 70 Levels of goblins, the PC gains a per- manent +1 to Attack and Defense rolls vs. goblins. For example, a PC slaying 3 L4 goblins has defeated (3x4)= 12 Levels of goblins.
Orcslayer: As soon as the PC slays 60 Levels of orcs, the PC gains a perma- nent +1 to Attack and Defense rolls vs. orcs.
Thundermaster: To complete this Milestone, a spellcaster must inflict 20 points of damage with the Lightning spell over the course of one or more ad- ventures. At least one Lightning spellcasting roll must have exploded. When the Milestone is completed, the PC gains a permanent +1 to spellcasting rolls for the Lightning spell. Spells cast from scrolls or magic items count for com- pleting this Milestone.
Slumbermaster: The PC specializes in the Sleep spell. Keep track of the total levels of all Foes put to sleep by the PC's spells, including any cast through scrolls or magic items. As soon as the total is 100, the PC gains a permanent
+1 to Sleep spellcasting rolls.
Scourge of the Hobgoblins: As soon as the PC slays 60 Levels of hobgoblins, the PC gains a permanent +1 to Attack and Defense rolls vs. hobgoblins.
Scourge of the Kobolds: As soon as the PC slays 100 Levels of kobolds, the PC gains a permanent +1 to Attack and Defense rolls vs. kobolds.
Witchfinder: As soon as the PC slays 10 witches, hags or warlocks of any level, the PC gains +1 on all Saves vs. spells/curses in witch, hag, or warlock encounters.
Vermin Exterminator: As soon as the PC has slain 100 Vermin Foes, the PC gains a permanent +1 Attack bonus vs. all Vermin Foes.
Gaze Resistance: As soon as the PC Saves successfully against the gaze of medusae or other Foes with the same ability at least 5 times, the PC gains a permanent +2 on all Saves vs. stone-turning gaze. The 5 successful Saves do not need to be consecutive: the PC may save 3 times in different adventures, then fail, then Save 2 times in a different adventure and still complete the Milestone.

120

Milestones

Scroll Librarian: As soon as the PC collects 20 scrolls and binds them into a grimoire, the scrolls are destroyed but the PC gets 1 additional spell slot. The extra slot must be assigned to a spell found on the scrolls sacrificed. The PC may NOT change this extra spell at every adventure,e.g., if the PC chooses a Sleep spell, the PC must always put 1 Sleep in the extra slot. Only spellcasters may take this Milestone. Illusionists create a necklace out of prisms, druid a book made of tree bark, but the effect is the same.
Gem Collector: As soon as the PC collects 10 gems worth at least 50gp each, the PC can have one item of jewelry built that will be worth 50% more than the sum of the value of all gems used. This has no cost and happens between adventures.
Panoplia: A PC collecting 1 magic weapon, 1 magic shield and 1 magic armor may spend 100gp to have them all decorated in the same style. This panoplia may be given to a local authority as a gift. This will earn the PC a favor. During the campaign, the PC may use the favor to receive a payment of up to 300 gp, ignore a fine of any value, get out of jail, or to get resur- rected (assuming the PC's body is carried home).
Thrice Blessed: After a PC with this Milestone has been resurrected 3 times, the PC gains a +1 permanent bonus to all Saves. To keep this ef- fect working, the PC must spend 10gp per Level prior to an adventure in
sacrifices to the gods. If the PC skips one payment, the bonus is suspended until the PC offers sacrifices again.






121


































Secrets


Secrets


hen the party has 3 Clues (gained during the current adven- ture or over multiple adventures), you may spend them to discover a Secret. Clues are discovered by a single PC, but are shared with the whole party. If the PC dies, move the Clue to another PC. Choose a PC to discover the Secret. That PC im- mediately gains 1 XP and chooses a Secret from the following list (supplements have their own Secrets with different costs and effects).
Weakness of a Foe: When you meet a Major Foe of your choice, you have a
+2 to attack that Foe. The bonus lasts for a whole combat, not for a single attack. All PCs and allies enjoy the bonus.
Deal with a Foe: When you encounter a Foe, you may declare that you have a deal with the creature. The Foe will let the party pass through the room without attacking, any time that you need to. You may not, however, take its Treasure. You may not use this Secret with Vermin or a Final Boss.
Location of a hidden treasure: Play this in any empty room (not the en- trance of a dungeon). Here a hidden treasure can be revealed by speaking a secret password. A niche opens in a wall, and you find 3d6x10gp.
Location of a magic item: When you enter any room in a dungeon (but not the first room), you recognize it as the location of a hidden magic item that can be revealed by speaking the correct password. Gain 1 magic item of your choice from any Random Magic Items Table.
True name of a spiritual entity: You are in contact with an angel or demon (your choice, but once chosen, it cannot be changed). During a game, you may call an angel to heal a single PC to full health or to rescue the PC out of a trapdoor; alternatively, you may call a demon to inflict 4 damage to a single Major Foe or kill up to 6 Minor Foes. Once used, this power is lost forever and may not be gained again by the same PC in the same campaign.
New spell: Only a spellcaster PC may reveal this Secret. Add a spell from any spell list or Random Table to the list of spells you can use. You immediately gain 1 temporary spell slot to be able to use that spell.
Increase of magical or spiritual power: This can be taken by a cleric or spellcaster, only once per PC in a campaign. You increase by 1 the number of times you can use a single specific spell or Prayer (Healing, Blessing)during an adventure. In other words, you gain 1 permanent spell slot or Prayer but only for a specific spell, chosen when the Secret is revealed.
Location of a scroll: Hidden in a niche, you find a scroll, piece of bark or prism with a spell of your choice.
Recipe for a potion: To reveal this Secret, the party must at least 2 Major Foes and spend 50gp for material components.
After doing so, an apprentice alchemist at home brews a new potion for you
123


between adventures. You may purchase a potion of healing before every adventure for 50gp.
Terrifying secret: Whenever a Foe or group of Foes must roll Morale in your presence, you may utter an unspeakable secret, and the Foes will automati- cally fail their Morale roll. This has no effect on Foes that do not test Morale or Final Bosses. You may discover multiple Terrifying Secrets and use them once each.
Someone will pay big money for that: You know a nobleman who lost an heirloom. If you find a jewel, gem, or any item of jewelry with a gp value, and you carry it out of the dungeon, you can sell it for 3 times its value.
Your enemy is in the dungeon: A chaos lord is your personal enemy. When you meet a Major Foe, you may exchange it with a chaos lord (result 5 on the Dungeon Boss Monster Table, p.170) and fight him at +1 to your Attack rolls. The bonus lasts for the whole combat.
The Prisoner: An important NPC (prince, noble, rich merchant, etc.) is a prisoner in the dungeon. You may meet the NPC in any room guarded by Minions or a Boss. If you bring the NPC out of the dungeon alive, you receive a random magic item and 1 Treasure roll, OR double your current gp, what- ever is best for you. The prisoner is chained to a wall. A PC can break the chain during combat with a successful Attack roll vs. L4. Rogues and bar- barians add +L on this roll. A PC rolling to free the prisoner may not attack any Foes that turn.
You descend from a bloodline of dragon-slayers: Only a barbarian or a dwarf may take this. The PC gains a new Trait called Dragonslayer. From now on, when fighting a dragon, the PC adds +1 to Defense and Attack rolls.
Secret diet: You learn a secret diet to increase your stamina. You may not share it with your allies. As long as you spend 100gp in food prior to each adventure, you have 1 extra Life until the end of the adventure. The diet is not magical and may be used by barbarians. Halflings spend only 50gp be- cause they have excellent food already! Unliving PCs may not use this Secret.





124
