Initiative Flowchart
Do Foes Surprise the party?

Yes	No






1) REACTIONS. Roll Reactions to determine Foes' action. If they fight, Foes perform ranged attacks and use spell-like abilities, if any.

2) RANGED. PCs perform ranged attacks and use spells, if any.

3) MELEE. Foes attack first. Foes that used ranged weapons spend the turn to draw melee weapons. Foes that use natural attacks (bite, claws, etc.) do not need to spend 1 turn drawing a weapon.
4) PCs attack. PCs that performed ranged attacks spend the turn to draw a melee weapon or fight un- armed (-2 to Attack roll) until they do so.





A weapon is ready if it is in the character's hand/s.
A spell is ready if the caster has one hand free to cast it. Hands holding lanterns, torches and magic items are NOT empty for purposes of spellcasting.
Something described as a Free Action can be done at any mo- ment (e.g., drinking a potion).


1) Choose ATTACK or REACTIONS: A)
Party attacks immediately or B) Roll Reactions to determine what Foes will do. If PCs attack immediately, PCs with ready ranged weapons/ spells perform ranged attacks/cast spells.
2) RANGED. Foes perform ranged attacks/use spell-like abilities, if any.

3) MELEE. PCs attack first. PCs who used ranged weapons spend the turn to draw melee weapons or at- tack at -2 (unarmed). PCs that cast spells and are wielding a weapon in the other hand do not need to spend 1 turn drawing a weapon.
4) MELEE. Surviving Foes attack. Foes that performed ranged attacks spend the turn to draw melee weapons. Foes with natu- ral attacks (bite, claws, etc.) do not need to do so.




    Effects triggered by seeing the Foe (e.g., medusa's gaze) or by entering its space, or described as happening "at the beginning of the encounter" happen before anything else.


Attack Modifiers Summary
Class-based modifiers
Dwarf, Warrior, Assassin, Barbarian, Paladin, Ranger: +L Elf with all weapons except two-handed melee weapons: +L Elf vs. orc Foes: +1
Cleric, Acrobat, Bulwark, Druid, Swashbuckler: +1/2 L Ranger using 2 weapons: +1/2L
Cleric vs. undead: +L
Rogue vs. outnumbered Minor Foe: +L Dwarf vs. goblins: +1
Bulwark using ranged weapons: +Tier Light gladiator using light weapons: +1/2 L
Mushroom monk using nunchaku, bo, sai, throwing stars: +L Mushroom monk unarmed attack: -1, 0 at L5+
Subdual attack: -1 Halfling using sling: +L
Kukla performing unarmed attack: -1 instead of -2 Kukla using dagger: 0 (cancels the -1 for a light weapon) Gnome using one-shot mechanical weapon: +L
Gnome using a gadget-enhanced weapon: +L until end of encounter
Situational Modifiers
Mounted character vs. Foe on foot: +1 Fighting in darkness: -2
Swashbuckler spending 1 Panache point: +1
Weapon-based Modifiers
Unarmed: -2
Light weapon: -1
Two-handed weapon: +1
Crossbow: +1
Handgun: +2
Black powder rifle: +3
Crushing weapon vs. skeleton: +1 Gilded weapon vs. elemental: +2 Silver weapon vs. were-creature: +1 Torch vs. flammable Foe: +2
Magic Weapons: As per the item's description
                    Trait-based Modifiers Barbarian with Beast Slayer Trait vs. Weird Monsters: +1 Dwarf with Axe Mastery Trait using an axe: +1
Halfling using sling with Sling Skill Trait: +Tier Illusionist using Illusionary Knife Throw: +Tier
Kukla using the Hidden Blade Trait: +Tier (once per encounter) Paladin with Mounted Fighter Trait: +Tier, +1 for being Mounted Ranger with Deadeye using bow or crossbow: +1
Rogue with Knife Fighter using knives: +Tier
Rogue with Backstabbing: Apply outnumbering modifier vs. Major Foes Warrior with Good Shot using ranged weapons: +1
Warrior with Sword or Mace Training using sword or mace: +Tier
Wizard with Scrapper Trait using light weapon: ignore -1 for light weapon


Defense Modifiers Summary
Class-based Defense Modifiers
Rogue, Acrobat: +L
Bulwark, Gnome, Kukla, Light Gladiator, Mushroom Monk, Swashbuckler:
+1/2
Dwarf vs. giants, trolls, ogres: +1
Halfling vs. giants, trolls, ogres, half-giants: +L



Fighting in darkness: -2

Situational Defense Modifiers

Sleeping: Automatically fail Defense rolls Withdrawing from a melee: +1
Fleeing a melee: +0, may not use shield
Defending vs. Foes equipped with flails: May not use shield bonus Light gladiator using Watch the Enemy: +1 vs. melee attacks only Mushroom Monk using Leap Away: +L
Acrobat failing a Vaulting Strike: -2 for a full turn Ranger vs. Sworn Enemy: Use higher Tier die
Ranger with Survival in appropriate terrain: Use higher Tier die Swashbuckler spending 1 Panache to increase Defense: +1
PC under a Protection spell: +1
PC under a Barkskin spell: +2, -2 vs. fire-based attacks PC under an Illusionary Armor spell: +Tier
Illusionary Servant defending: +2
Under an Illusionary Fog and fleeing/withdrawing from a melee: +2 First Defense roll vs. charging minotaurs or cave orcs: -1
Under effect of Evil Eye from a Chaos Lord: -1
PC with a light source defending from a morlock: +2
Armor-based Defense Modifiers
Light armor: +1
Heavy Armor: +2
Shield: +1
Leafsteel armor: +2 (can be found as loot) Gnome with activated Clockwork armor: +3
Magic shield, armor, ring, etc.: As per the item's description
                   Trait-based Defense Modifiers Bulwark/Paladin with Shieldwall standing next to ally with shield: +1 Cleric with Sacred Defense vs. demons/undead: +1
Cleric with Divine Protection: +1 Druid with Wildform: +1
Druid with Leafsteel Familiarity, wearing Leafsteel Armor: +1
Gnome with Clockwork Armor Specialist wearing clockwork armor, vs. first attack received: +1
Halfling with Nimble Dodge: +1 Illusionist with Hazy Veil: +Tier Mushroom Monk with Though Cap:+1
Swashbuckler with Blade Dance spending X Panache on Defense: +X Warrior with Tight Guard vs. the first attack of any encounter: +1 Wizard with Scrapper: +1

Tile Generation
Roll d6 to select a starting tile. Roll d66 to select new tiles. Tiles marked with C are Corridors. Unmarked tiles are Rooms.

Tile Content Table (2d6)

2	Treasure. Roll on the Treasure Table.
Treasure protected by a Trap. Roll on the Traps Table and then on the Treasure Table.

If this tile is a corridor, it is Empty and may be Searched. If it is a room, roll on the Special Events Table.

This tile is Empty and may be Searched. In dungeons, roll on the Special Feature Table. In caverns, roll on the Caverns Special Feature Table on p.112. In Fungal grottoes, you find a Secret Passage.
Vermin encounter. Roll on the Vermin Table appropriate to your envi- ronment.

Minion encounter. Roll on the Minion Table appropriate to your environment.

If this is a corridor, it is Empty and may be Searched. If it is a room, roll on the Minions Table appropriate to your environment.

This tile is Empty and may be Searched; alternatively, spend 2 Clues to find a Secret Passage.

If this tile is a corridor, it is Empty and may be Searched. If it is a room, roll on the Weird Monsters Table appropriate to your environ- ment.

Boss Encounter. Roll on the Boss Monster Table appropriate to your environment.

This tile is empty if it is a corridor. If it is a room, it is a dragon's lair (Young dragon, Cave Dragon or Fungal Dragon as appropriate to your environment).



Every time you roll a Major Foe, roll d6 and add +1 for each Major Foe encountered so far. On a 6+, you have found the Final Boss.


152

When you find a Secret Passage, you may move to a different environ- ment of your choice, e.g., Fungal Grottoes or Caverns if you are in a Dungeon.

Dungeon Special Feature Table (d6)


Fountain/Pool: This is a source of fresh, clean water, and all liv- ing PCs can drink and clean their wounds. All PCs recover 1 Life the first time they encounter a fountain in an adventure. Further fountains have no effect. No effect on PCs who did not lose any Life so far in the adventure.


Blessed Temple/Shrine: A PC of your choice gains a +1 on Attack rolls against undead Foes or demons. As soon as the PC kills an undead or demon, no matter if a Minor or Major Foe, the bonus disappears.

Armory: All PCs can change their weap- ons if they want, within the limits of their class. All PCs who lost their weapons may pick up a new one.

Cursed Altar: An eerie glow emanates from a sinister al- tar. A random PC is cursed and has -1 on Defense rolls. To break the curse, the PC must slay a Major Foe alone, enter a Blessed Temple (see 2, above), or receive a Blessing.


Statue: You may leave it alone or touch it. If you touch it, roll d6. On a 1-3, it awak- ens and fights to the death (HCL+3 Artifi- cial Boss Monster, Tier+5 Life, Tier damage, immune to poison, disease and all spells; if you defeat it, you find 3d6x10gp inside). On a 4-6, the statue breaks, you find 3d6x10gp inside but gain no XP from the encounter. A living statue is a Major Foe and may be the Final Boss (roll as usual to determine if it is a Final Boss) and it gives 1 XP roll. If it is a Final Boss, increase its Treasure to 100gp.


The tile contains a puzzle box. Roll d6 to determine its L. You may leave it alone or try to solve it with a Save vs. its L. For every failed attempt, the PC is hit by a blast of energy from the box (1 damage). Wizards and rogues add +L to this Save. If the puzzle is solved, the box opens: roll on the Treasure Table to determine its contents.

Dungeon Special Events Table (d6)


A ghost passes through the party. All PCs must Save vs. L4 fear or lose 1 Life or gain 1 Madness (player's choice). Paladins are immune. Clerics add +L. PCs whose Madness total surpasses their L lose their mind and run away, never to be seen again.

Wandering Monsters attack! Roll d6: 1-3 roll on the Vermin Table, 4 roll on the Minions Table, 5 roll on the Weird Monsters Table, 6 roll on the Boss Monster Table. Reroll any dragons or other Foes that are never encountered as Wandering Monsters. Major Foes met as Wandering Monster cannot be the Final Boss.

A Lady in White appears and asks you to com- plete a Quest. If you accept, roll on the Quest Table. If you refuse, she disappears. Ignore any further appearances of the Lady. If you complete the Quest and return where you met her, gain 1 XP and 1 roll on the Epic Rewards Table.
4	Roll on the Traps Table.
You meet a wandering healer, who will heal PCs at the cost of 10gp per Life healed. You may heal as many Life points as you can afford. You can meet the healer only once per adventure. If you meet the healer again, reroll this result.


You meet a wandering alchemist. Each PC may buy 1 potion of healing (50gp) and/or 1 dose of blade poison (30gp).
Potion: Heal all lost Life to a single PC. Can be swallowed at any moment as a free action.
Poison: Envenom a single arrow or slash- ing weapon (not a crushing weapon) giving
+1 on Attack rolls vs. the first Foe you fight. Doesn't apply vs. Foes immune to poison (undead, demons, blobs, automatons, molds, fungi, elementals, living statues). You can meet the wandering alchemist only once per adventure. If you roll this re- sult again, roll on the Traps Table instead.


Caverns Special Events Table (d6)


You encounter a cave goblin scout. If you pay 10gp, he warns you of danger. Your PCs cannot be surprised by any Foe, including Wandering Monsters, and have a +1 to all Saves until you exit the caverns. If you do not pay, the goblin shrugs and walks away.
You encounter d6 cavemen explorers looking for food. Give them 2 Food rations (for the whole group) or fight them. They are HCL+3 Minions armed with clubs, standard Morale, 1 Life, 1 attack per turn, no Treasure.

You encounter a morlock Spy. If you pay 5gp, the Morlock betrays his companions. After speaking with him, you cannot be surprised by any morlocks, even those encountered as Wandering Monsters, until you leave the caverns. If you don't pay, he runs away grumbling insults.
4	Trap. Roll on the Cavern Trap Table.
If you have a dwarf in the party, you find a gem worth d6x10gp. To collect it, however, you must risk a 1-in-6 chance of Wandering Monsters. If there's no dwarf, ignore this event.

You meet a dwarf miner. You may sell any gems found or buy up to d6 gems worth 25gp each. If you makes any trade with the dwarf, the dwarf will reveal the contents of the next tile (roll it ahead of time and decide whether or not to enter: the dwarf describes what is there, in detail, including any Treasure).



Fungal Grottoes Special Events Table (d6)


You encounter a halfling scout. If you pay 10gp, he warns you of danger. The PCs cannot be surprised by any Foe, including Wandering Monsters, and will have a +1 to all Saves until they exit the fungal grot- toes. If you do not pay, the halfling bids you farewell and walks away.

You encounter d6+2 cavemen looking for mushrooms. Give them 4 Food rations or 1 rare mushroom or fight them. They are HCL+3 Minions armed with clubs, standard Morale, 1 Life, 1 attack per turn, no Trea- sure. If you feed them, they will show you a secret passage (in next tile) leading from the fungal grottoes to the caves.

Spore cloud. All living PCs, except mushroom monks, must Save vs. HCL poison or lose 2 Life. Halflings and barbarians add +L to this Save.

Trap. Roll on the Fungal Grottoes Trap Table and then on the Fungal Grottoes Rare Item Table.

If you have a mushroom monk in the party, you sense danger approach- ing through the mycelial network. You may automatically ignore the next Trap or Wandering Monsters encounter in the fungal grottoes. If you do not have a mushroom monk, ignore this event. The warning has no effect in other environments.

You meet a merchant. You can buy any item from the Equipment list, but all prices are 20% higher (round up). You can also sell gems or rare mushroom for their full resale value in gp. This event is unique. If you roll it again during the same adventure, count as 4, above.


Treasure Table (d6)

0-	All environments: No treasure found.
1	All environments: d6gp Dungeon/Caverns: 2d6gp.
Fungal grottoes: 2d6 Food rations or 1 roll on the Rare Mushroom Table.


Dungeon: A scroll with a random wizard spell.
Fungal Grottoes: Choose: a piece of bark with a random druid spell or 1 roll on the Rare Mushroom Table.
Cavern: A prism with a random illusionist spell.

Dungeon: A jewel worth 2d6x5gp.
Fungal Grottoes: Choose, a gem worth 2d6x5gp or 2 rolls on the Rare Mushroom Table.
Cavern: A gem worth 3d6x5gp.

Dungeon: A treasure chest with 3d6x10gp.
Fungal Grottoes: Choose, a gem worth 2d6x10gp or 3 rolls on the Rare Mushroom Table.
Cavern: Choose, a gem worth 3d6x10gp or a prism with a random illusionist spell.

Dungeon: Roll on the Dungeon Magic Treasure Table. Caverns: Roll on the Caverns Special Item Table.
Fungal Grottoes: Choose, roll on the Dungeon Magic Treasure Table or roll on the Fungal Grottoes Rare Item Table.


Dungeon Magic Treasure Table (d6)



Wand of Sleep, 3 charges. The user may spend 1 charge to cast Sleep. Only wizards, illusionists and elves may use it. Add +L to the spellcasting roll. Resale value: 30gp per remaining charge.

Ring of Teleportation. Allows the user to automatically pass a Defense roll, teleporting the PC out of the room. The PC may no longer take part in the current combat, but rejoins the party as soon as it ends. After 1 use, the ring loses its powers. Resale value: If unused, 50gp. If used, d6+1gp.

Fools' Gold. This pouch of magical (but fake) gold coins will let you automatically bribe the next Foe that asks for a bribe. No matter how much the Foe asks, the gold will be enough to satisfy its request. This is a one-use magic item. If unused, it can be resold for 20gp.

Magic Weapon. Gives +1 to Attack rolls. This is a permanent magic item. Roll d6 to determine its type: 1) crushing light weapon, 2) slashing light weapon, 3) crushing hand weapon, 4) slashing hand weapon, 5) slashing two-handed weapon, 6) bow with 12 arrows. Resale value: 100gp+ 2x weapon's cost.

Potion of Healing. Can be imbibed at any mo- ment, even during combat, as a free action, heal- ing all lost Life to a single PC. This is a one-use magic item. No PC may drink more than 1 Potion of Healing per adventure. Resale value: 100gp.

Dungeon/caverns: Fireball Staff, 2 charges. Spending 1 charge allows the user to cast Fireball. Only wizards may use it. Add the PC's L to the spellcasting roll, as for a spell cast by that PC. Resale value: 60gp per charge remaining. Fungal Grottoes: Roll on the Rare Mushroom Table.

Rare Mushroom Table (d6)



Slumber Amanita. Resale value: 10gp. One use. A PC may use this mushroom to add +Tier bonus when casting the Sleep spell. The bonus applies also if the spell is cast from a scroll or an item, such as a Wand of Sleep. Using the mushroom requires only the action needed to cast the spell.

Puffball Smokebomb. Resale value: 5gp. One use. You may drop this mushroom as a free action.
You do not need a free hand to do so. This allows the party to flee a combat encounter without receiving any attacks. Mushroom and artificial Foes are unaffected and attack normally.

Brown Cap Delight. Delicious and nutritious, this mushroom counts as 1 Food Ration when eaten and as 3 Rations if used for a bribe (if allowed by the Foe's Bribe Reaction). Resale value: 15gp.

Phoenix Mushroom. A living PC who eats this mushroom gains +1 to all Defense rolls and Saves for 30 minutes (3 tiles). At the end of this period, the user loses 1 Life. Commerce of phoenix is ille- gal in most towns. It can be resold for 15gp.

Purple Truffle. This is so rare that, when you find it, you must roll a 3-in-6 chance that what you found is not the real deal, but a similar mushroom of small- er value (1d6gp). Halflings may reroll this 3-in-6 chance. The real purple truffle can be sold for 6d6gp.

Healer's Chanterelle. This mushroom can be eaten to heal all damage on a PC; if not used, it loses its power at the end of the adventure.


Rare mushrooms are equivalent to herbal rem- edies and are not considered magic, even when they cause spell-like effects. They can be used by any PC. Mushrooms that need to be ingested may be used only by living PCs. It's not possible to eat mushrooms during combat.




Caverns Special Item Table (d6)


1	A small gemstone worth 3d6+3gp.

Glittering Crystal. This gem glows like a lantern and can be worn around a PC's neck with a leather string, freeing the use of one hand. Resale value: 25gp. It is not considered a magic item and can be used by any PC.

Map Fragment. At any time, you may use it to roll the contents of the next tile before entering it. You may use it only once.
The map fragment has no value outside of the Caverns section of the current adventure. It is worth 30gp for purposes of the Bribe Reaction while in the Caverns.

Adventurer's Dead Body. In addition to a pouch with d6 gems worth 10gp each, you find 1 item of your choice from the fol- lowing list: Heavy Armor, Lantern, 2-handed Weapon, Bow, Crossbow, Scroll with Blessing, Scroll with a random spell, Jar of chicken blood (can be used for a Blood Offering Reaction).


Miners' Ointment. This ointment masks the smell of adventurers. You can use it once to ignore the arrival of Wandering Monsters or to avoid invisible gremlins. It is not a magic item and can be resold for 20gp if not used. One use.

Miners' Amulet. When worn by a PC in position 1 of the Marching Order, this magic item allows you to ignore 1 Trap within the caverns. It may be used once per adventure, and sold for 30gp. Multiple amulets worn by the same PC or by different PCs have no cumulative effect.






Choose: 1 small gemstone (2d6+2gp) or 1 suit of leafsteel armor (+2 to Defense rolls, counts as Light armor, non-mag- ical; the leaves dry out and must be discarded after 3 adventures).

Xicthul's Cap. This rare mushroom is infused with the powers of chaos and bears Xichtul's Eye on its cap. It can be thrown to inflict d3 damage on a Foe. The damage is automatic. Throwing it requires 1 turn. The user takes 1 damage when it is thrown. Resale value: 60gp.

Red Death. This rare mushroom can be thrown at a living Foe, automatically inflicting 1 damage or reducing the Foe's L by 1 (choose the effect
when the mushroom is found). It has no effect on unliving foes. Throwing it requires 1 turn.

Adventurer's Dead Body. In addition to a backpack with 1 rope, 2d6 Food rations and 2d6gp, you find 1 item of your choice from the following list: Heavy Armor, Lantern, 2-handed Weapon, Bow, Crossbow, Scroll with Blessing, Scroll with a random spell.

Mushroom Gatherer's Basket. You find a basket with d6 white angel mushrooms. Each can be eaten as a Food ration, causing the PC to heal 2 Life. The white angels lose their healing power at the end of the adventure, but they are still delicious and can be sold for 10gp each.

Morel Crusher. When broken, this dried morel mush- room projects vivid hallucinations to frighten Foes. Single use. The user may cause a Morale roll at -1 (plus the Foe's Morale modifier, if any) in a Foe. Foes who never Test Morale, Foes who rolled a "fight to the death" Reaction, unliving Foes and those immune to poison are unaffected. Resale value: 40gp.

Quest Table (d6)


Bring me its head! The Quest-giver asks you to kill a Boss Monster. Roll on any Boss Monster Table to select a target. The next time you meets a Boss, instead of rolling it, you may choose to encounter the Boss Monster from the Quest. Bring- ing its head to the Quest-giver's tile completes the Quest.

Bring me Gold! To complete this Quest, bring d6 x 50gp worth of Treasure to the Quest-giver's tile. If you already have that amount, double the amount required. In caverns, the amount must be in gems. In fungal grottoes, it must be in rare mush- rooms.

I want it alive! As 1, above, but you must subdue the Foe (using subdual attacks at -1 and/or Sleep spells) and bring it to the Quest-giver. You will need a rope to bind the subdued Foe. If you roll a Foe immune to subdual damage, reroll.

Bring me that! Retrieve a rare item. Roll on any Items Table to determine what. If you already have that item, roll again. Every time you slay a Major Foe, roll a 1-in-6 chance of finding the item in its loot. To complete the Quest, bring the item to the Quest-giver's tile without using it.

Let peace be your way! To complete the Quest, complete at least 3 encounters in a non violent way: Bribing, getting help from Foes, accepting and performing another Quest (not this one), or defeating Foes with the Sleep spell are all non violent. You do not need to return to the Quest-giver to collect your reward.

Slay all the Foes! To complete the Quest, the layout of the dungeon must be completed (fill the 20x28 grid) and all the occupants slain, except the Quest-giver. When these conditions are met, you may claim your reward without returning to the Quest-giver.



Epic Rewards Table (d6)


The Book of Skalitos. This book belonged to the legendary wiz- ard Skalitos. It counts as 1 scroll of each of the 6 basic wizard spells. You may tear up the pages and distribute the scrolls among the party, or leave the book as it is and assign it to a single PC. The book is destroyed if the carrier is killed by dragon breath. If unused, it may be sold for 650gp.

The Gold of Kerrak Dar. You learn the location of a treasure that belonged to a dwarf whose greed was legendary. As soon as you Search a tile, you may spend 1 Clue to find a chest with 500gp.

Enchanted weapon. One of the party's weapons is enchanted. Roll 2 dice for its Attack rolls, choosing the best result. If both dice roll an Explosion, roll both Explosions and choose the best. The weapon can hit Foes hit only by magic. The enchantment lasts until the end of the adventure.

Shield of Warning. This magic shield's pro- tection counts even if the user is surprised by Wandering Monsters, fleeing from a combat, or fighting Foes that ignore shields. This is a permanent magic item. Resale value: 200gp.

Arrow of slaying. This arrow will automatically inflict 3 damage upon a specific Foe. Roll on any Major Foe Table to determine which Foe is affected by it. The arrow may be used only by a PC with a bow. It strikes automatically against its designed tar- get. Once used, the arrow breaks. If unused, it may be sold for 3d6x15gp.

Holy symbol of healing. A cleric using this symbol adds +2 to the Life points healed by the Healing prayer. If the PC dies and the symbol and the cleric's body are delivered to the cleric's temple, the church will pay for an attempt to resurrect the cleric. After the resurrection attempt, the holy symbol will
remain with the church. Resale value: 700gp.

Dungeon Traps Table (d6)

Dart! A random PC must make a Defense roll vs. HCL+1 or lose 1 Life. Halflings may reroll a failed Defense roll.

Poison gas! All PCs must Save vs. HCL+2 poison or lose 1 Life. Barbarians and halflings add +L to the Save.

A trapdoor (HCL+3 trap) opens under the feet of the PC leading the Marching Order, who must Save. Roll at -1 if wearing light armor, -2 if wearing heavy armor,+1 if halfling or elf. Rogues add +L. A PC failing the Save falls into the trapdoor, losing 1 Life. It will take at least another PC to help the fallen PC out of the trapdoor. If you fall in a trapdoor and you are alone, you die.

The PC leading the Marching Order steps on a bear trap and must Save vs. HCL+3. Halflings and elves add +1. Rogues add +L. If the Save fails, the PC has a foot caught in the bear trap and loses 1 Life. The PC will Save at -2 vs. other bear traps or trap- doors and be at -1 to Attack and Defense rolls until that lost Life is recovered.

Spears come out of a wall and attack 2 random PCs. PCs failing a Defense roll vs. a HCL+4 attack lose 1 Life.


A giant stone falls on the PC in position 4 the Marching Or- der. The PC must make a Defense roll vs. an HCL+4 attack or lose 2 Life. The bonus from armor applies, but the bonus from a shield does not.



When you find a Trap, roll on this Table to determine its type. Some can be avoided with a Defense roll; others require a Save.
A rogue in position 1 or 2 of the Marching Order gets a chance to disarm the Trap before it is triggered. The rogue Saves vs. the Trap's L, adding +L. If the Save suc- ceeds, the rogue spots the Trap and warns the party just in time. If it fails, the Trap goes off; apply its effect. If the rogue is targeted by the Trap, the rogue still gets a Save or Defense roll vs. the Trap.


164


Caverns Traps Table (d6)

A stalactite falls! A random PC must Save vs. HCL+2 Trap or lose 1 Life. All PCs Save at +1/2 L. Rogues add
+L. Halflings add +1/2 and may reroll a failed Save.

Rockslide. Loose stones are dislodged, sending a cascade of rocks down the tunnel. All PCs must Save vs. HCL+2 Trap or lose 1 Life. All PCs Save at +1/2 L. Rogues, gnomes and dwarves add
+L. Halflings add +1/2 and may reroll a failed Save.

Hidden Pit. The first PC in Marching Order must Save vs. HCL+1 Trap or fall into a pit, losing 1 Life. All PCs Save at +1/2 L. Rogues add +L. Halflings add +1/2 and may reroll a failed Save. The PC needs the help of another to climb out of the pit. If you spend
1 Clue, at the bottom of the pit you find a Secret Passage to the dungeon or fungal grottoes (choose).

Swinging Log Trap. A large wooden log, bound with vines, swings from the ceiling. All PCs must Save, in Marching Order (first, the PC at position 1, then the PC at position 2, and so on) vs. an HCL Trap. All PCs Save at +1/2 L. Rogues add +L. Halflings add +1/2L and may reroll a failed Save. The process stops when a PC fails to Save and loses 2 Life, or if all Save successfully.

A random PC steps on a patch of mushrooms, releasing toxic spores. The PC must Save vs. HCL+1 poison or be at -1 on all Saves for 6 rooms (1 hour). All PCs Save at +1/2 L. Rogues and foresters add +L. Mushroom monks are immune. Halflings add
+1/2 and may reroll a failed Save. If a mushroom PC leads the Marching Order (position 1), ignore this Trap.

Rolling Boulder. Choose if it comes from the back or from the front of the party. 1d3 PCs in Marching Order must Save vs. HCL+1 Trap or lose 2 Life each. All PCs Save at +1/2 L. Rogues add +L. Halflings add +1/2 and may reroll a failed Save. At the end of the process, the boulder rolls towards another opening (choose one on the tile) and gets stuck in it. That opening is now blocked and cannot be accessed.








165

Fungal Grottoes Traps Table (d6)


Sleep spores. A random PC must Save vs. HCL Trap or release a cloud of spores that will put to sleep all PCs who fail a Save vs. HCL poison. Mushroom, artificial, undead, elemental PCs are immune. Halflings add +L. All other PCs add +1/2L. If all PCs fall asleep, the whole party dies.

Spore Cloud. A random PC must Save vs. HCL+1 Trap or step on a purple puffball, releasing its toxic spores. On a failure, the PC must Save vs. HCL+3 poison or lose 1 Life and start coughing, triggering a 1-in-6 chance of Wandering Monsters. Mushroom, artificial, undead, and elemental PCs are immune. Halflings and barbar- ians add +L. All other PCs add +1/2L.

Slime Patch. The PC leading the Marching Order must Save vs. HCL Trap or fall down. Roll a 1-in-6 chance of Wandering Monsters. If they come, the fallen PC will skip 1 turn as s/he struggles back to his/her feet.

Mycelium Snare. A random PC must Save vs. HCL+3 Trap. On a failure, an object in their hands (shield, weapon, lantern, etc., player's choice) is snatched by a bunch of fungal fibers drop- ping from the ceiling, never to be seen again.

Shrieking Mushroom. The PC leading the Marching Order has a 4-in-6 chance of disturbing a small mushroom that will shriek, causing Wandering Monsters to arrive. Reduce this chance by 2 if the PC is a halfling or forester (druid, ranger or any other outdoor class) and by 1 if it's a rogue.

Cordyceps Trap. A random PC must Save vs. HCL+3 poison or be infected with a mind-controlling fungus parasite and attack the ally with the fewest current Life points (the at-
tacked PC must defend vs. the L of the controlled PC). All PCs Save at +1/2L vs. the infection. Halflings and barbarians Save at +L. The mind control effect will wear off after 6 turns or if a Blessing or Healing are used. An ally killed by the infected PC will rise as an undead Boss Monster (Tier+1 Life, L equal to the dead PC's L) and attack a random PC.

Dungeon Vermin Table (d6)


3d6 Rats, HCL Animal Vermin (max. L4). No Treasure. At the end of the encounter, every PC wounded by a rat must roll a 1-in-6 chance of losing 1 Life to infection.
Goblins, trolls, orcs, lizardmen and ogres eat rats. Count each rat as 1 Food ration for them.
Reactions (d6): 1-3 Flee, 4-6 Fight

3d6 Vampire Bats, HCL Animal Vermin (max. L3). No Treasure. Spellcasting rolls are at -1 due to their distracting shrieking. Despite the vampire moniker, these creatures are animals, not undead.
Reactions (d6): 1-3 Flee, 4-6 Fight.

2d6 Goblin Swarmlings, HCL+1 Vermin (max. L4). Treasure -1, Morale -1. Dwarves attack goblin swarmlings at +1 to Attack rolls.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-3 Flee if outnumbered, 4 Bribe (5gp each), 5-6 Fight.


d6 Giant Centipedes, HCL+1 Animal Vermin (max. L3). No Treasure. All living PCs hit by a centipede must Save vs. L2 poison or lose 1 additional Life.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-3 Flee if outnumbered, 4-6 Fight.



d6 Vampire Frogs, HCL+3 Animal Vermin (max. L5). Treasure -1. Despite the vampire moniker, these am- phibian blood-suckers are animals, not undead.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-3 Blood offering, 4 Fight, 5-6 Fight to the death.



2d6 Skeletal Rats, HCL+2 Undead Vermin (max. L5). No Treasure. Immune to Sleep, disease and poison. Unaffected by ranged weapons (except firearms). Crushing weapons attack them at +1. A vial of holy water automatically destroys 2 skeletal rats.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Flee, 3-6 Fight.

Dungeon Minions Table (d6)

Roll d6: 1-3= d6+2 Skeletons, 4-6= d6 Zombies. Both are: HCL+2 Undead Minions, No treasure. Never test Morale. Immune to Sleep, poison, disease. A vial of holy water will automatically destroy 1 skeleton or zombie. Crushing weap- ons attack skeletons at +1. Arrows/crossbow bolts are at -1 vs. skeletons and zombies. Zombies are max. L6.
Reactions: Always Fight to the death.

d6+3 Goblins, HCL+2 Minions (Max. L6), Treasure -1. Dwarves attack goblins at +1. Goblins have a 1-in-6 chance of surprising the party. Roll on their Reactions if they do, even if met as Wandering Monsters.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee if outnumbered, 2-3 Bribe (5gp each), 4-6 Fight.

d6 Hobgoblins, HCL+3 Minions. Treasure +1. Reactions (d6): 1 Flee if outnumbered, 2-3 Bribe (10gp each), 4-5 Fight, 6 Fight to the death.


d6+1 Orcs, HCL+3 Minions (max. L10). Elves attack orcs at +1. Orcs fear magic and must roll Morale every turn in which 1+ orcs are defeated by a spell. If the spell reduces their number to 1/2 or less, their Morale roll is at -1. They never have magic items in their loot. If you roll one, you find d6xd6gp instead. Reactions (d6): 1-2 Bribe (10gp each), 3-5 Fight, 6 Fight to the death

d3 Trolls, HCL+4 Minions (max. L7). Halflings add +L to De- fense rolls vs. trolls. Trolls regenerate unless slain by magic, fire or acid, or unless a PC spends 1 turn to hack their bodies to pieces with a slashing weapon. Otherwise, every slain troll has a 2-in-6 chance of returning to life on its next turn, continuing to fight.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Fight, 3-6 Fight to the death. If there are dwarves in the party, trolls always fight to the death.


2d6 Mushroom Men, HCL+2 Minions (max. L10). Living PCs hit by a mushroom man must Save vs. L3 poison or lose 1 additional Life. Halflings Save at +L. Mushroom PCs are immune.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Bribe (6gp each), 3-6 Fight.

Dungeon Weird Monsters Table (d6)


Minotaur, HCL+4 Weird Monster, Tier+3 Life, 2 attacks. Due to its charge, the first Defense roll vs. a minotaur's attack is at
-1. Halflings can't use Luck in minotaur encounters.
Reactions: 1-2 Bribe (60gp), 3-5 Fight, 6 Fight to the death.

Iron Eater, HCL+2 Weird Monster, Tier+3 Life, 3 attacks, no treasure. Its attacks inflict no damage but destroy metal items, including magic ones: first armor, then shields, then main weapon, then 3d6gp, in this order. Light armor and shield give their normal Defense bonuses against its attacks. Heavy armor does not, unless it is non-metallic. Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-3 Bribe (d6gp to distract the creature but you can't use Fools' Gold), 4-6 Fight.

Chimera, HCL+4 Chaos Weird Monster, Tier+5 Life, 3 attacks. Roll a 2-in-6 chance each turn that it will breathe fire instead of performing its 3 attacks. If it does so, all PCs must Save vs. L4 fire or lose 1 Life. Reactions (d6): 1 Bribe (50gp), 2-6 Fight.

Catoblepas, HCL+3 Weird Monster, Tier+3 Life, Trea- sure +1. At the beginning of the encounter, all PCs must Save vs. L4 gaze or lose 1 Life.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-6 Fight.


Giant Spider, HCL+4 Weird Monster, Tier+2 Life.
2 attacks, Treasure: 2 rolls. A living PC hit by the giant spider must Save vs. L3 poison or lose 1 Life. Because of the spider's web, PCs may not flee until a Fireball is cast (in addition to damaging the spider, it will burn its web) or a torch is spent to destroy it.
Reactions: Always Fight.


Invisible Gremlins. Gremlins have no stats. They are an event, not a Foe, and cannot be the Final Boss. They steal d6+3 items from the PCs. Items protected with gremlin repellant will not be stolen. Items are taken
in this order: magic items, scrolls, potions, weapons, gems, gold (10gp at a time). If the gremlins steal ALL the equipment, they will leave a thank you message which counts as 1 Clue. Many game effects offer differ- ent levels of protection against gremlins. Discovering them is part of the game!


169

Dungeon Boss Monsters Table (d6)


Mummy HCL+4 Undead Boss, Tier+3 Life, 2 attacks, Treasure
+2, never rolls Morale. Immune to Sleep and poison. A PC slain by a mummy becomes a mummy one turn later and attacks the party. A mummy is flammable. Fire-based attacks and torches attack them at +2 and a flask of oil adds another +2. Reaction: Always Fight to the death.

Orc Brute, HCL+4 Boss, Tier+4 Life, 2 attacks, Treasure +1. Elves attack him at +1. It never has any magic items in its loot: count them as d6xd6gp instead.
Reactions (d6): 1 Bribe (50gp), 2-5 Fight, 6 Fight to the death.

Ogre, HCL+4 Boss, Tier+4 Life. Its attacks inflict Tier+1 damage.
Reactions (d6): 1 Bribe (30gp), 2-3 Fight, 4-6 Fight to the death.

Medusa, HCL+3 Boss, Tier+3 Life, Treasure +1. At the be- ginning of the encounter, before ranged attacks, all PCs must Save vs. L4 gaze or be turned to stone. Rogues add
+1/2L to the Save. A Blessing restores 1 PC.
Reactions (d6): 1 Bribe (6d6gp), 2 Quest, 3-5 Fight, 6 Fight to the death.

Chaos Lord, HCL+5 Chaos Boss, Tier+3 Life, 3 attacks, 2 Trea- sure rolls at +1 and a 2-in-6 chance of 1 Clue. Roll d6 to de- termine its powers: 1-3 no power, 4 evil eye (all PCs must Save vs.L4 magic or be at -1 on their Defense rolls until he is slain), 5 energy drain (PCs hit must Save vs. L4 magic or lose 1 L; a Blessing restores all lost levels), hellfire blast (at the beginning of the encounter, all PCs must Save vs. L6 magic or lose 2 Life, clerics Save at +1/2 L).
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee if outnumbered, 2 Fight, 3-6 Fight to the death.

Young Dragon, HCL+5 Boss, Tier+4 Life, 2 attacks, 3 Treasure rolls at +1. Immune to Sleep. On each of its turns, roll d6. On a 1-2, it breathes fire (all PCs must Save vs. L6 breath or lose 2 Life; all add +1/2L to this Save). On a 3-6, it attacks 2 random targets (1 dam- age). Never encountered as a Wandering Monster. Reactions (d6): 1 Sleep (all PCs have +2 to their first At- tack roll), 2-3 Bribe (all the party's gp with a minimum of 100gp or 1 magic item), 4 Quest, 5-6 Fight.


170

Caverns Vermin Table (d6)

2d6 Echo Bats, HCL+1 Animal Vermin (max. L4), Morale +1, no Treasure. In tiles with the Echo rule, increase their L by 1.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2 Ignore, 3-5 Blood Offering, 6 Fight.

2d6+1 Mud Centipede, HCL Animal Vermin (max. L4), Standard Morale, no Treasure. They always ignore the PCs unless encountered in a tile with a water pool and the PCs inspect the pool - in that case, they always Fight to protect their eggs.
Reactions: Ignore or Fight, see above.

3d6 Vengeance Cockroaches, HCL+1 Animal Vermin (max. L3), no Treasure. Immune to Sleep. If some flee, note how many escape. The next time you encounter them during the same adventure, add the number of escaped cockroaches to those encountered.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Flee, 3 Bribe (4 Food rations), 4-6 Fight.

d6+1 Stalactomimics, HCL+2 Elemental Vermin, no Treasure. Immune to Sleep and Poison. These small rock elementals look like stalactites and hide on cave ceilings, plummeting on their victims to impale them with their sharp tips. Each attacks only once, always surprising the PCs.
Reactions (d6): 1-3 Ignore, 4-6 Fight.
d6+2 Screaming Toads, HCL+3 Animal Vermin, Mo- rale +1, no Treasure. Their deafening croaking gives
-1 to all spellcasting rolls. If they are not slain within a single turn, roll a 2-in-6 chance that Wandering Monsters arrive at the end of the encounter.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Flee, 3 Bribe (4 Food), 4-6 Fight.

d6 Red Cave Spiders, HCL+2 Animal Vermin, Morale
-1. Immune to Poison. Any living PC taking 2+ dam- age will have a paralyzed limb (roll d6, 1-3 arm, 4-6 leg). A paralyzed arm cannot sling a shield or use
a ranged or two-handed weapon, but can hold a lantern or a torch. A PC with a paralyzed leg cannot flee. A Healing or Blessing removes the paralysis.
Ogres, trolls and goblins consider these spiders a delicacy (a spider is 1 Food for them).
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Flee, 3-4 Fight, 5-6 Fight to the death.

171

Caverns Minions Table (d6)

d6+1 Morlocks, HCL+3 Minions, Morale -1. These pale, cowardly underground humanoids dislike light. A PC with a lantern, torch or other light source has +2 to Defense rolls against them.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Bribe (15gp or 5 Food rations for the whole group), 3 Offer information (counts as the Morlock Spy result on the Caverns Events Table), 4-6 Fight.

d6+1 Cave Goblins, HCL+2 Minions (Max. L5), Morale -1, Treasure -1. 2-in-6 chance of surprise. They are armed with poor quality clubs: PCs in Heavy Armor have an addi- tional +1 to Defense rolls.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-3 Bribe (5gp per goblin), 4-6 Fight.


2d6 Cave Skeletons, Undead, HCL+2 Minions, Morale: Never. Animated bones of miners, covered in mud. Their camouflage gives them a 1-in-6 chance of surprise. Armed with pickaxes. Crushing weapons attack them at +1. A vial of holy water automatically destroys 2 skeletons.
Reaction: Always Fights to the death.

d6+1 Rat Men of the Deep, HCL+2 Minions. Before me- lee, each rat man performs an HCL+3 ranged attack with its crossbow. In melee they use flails: PC ignore shield Defense bonuses.
Reactions (d6): 1-3 Bribe (1 Ration or 5gp or 1 Mushroom per rat man), 4-6 fight.

d6+1 Cave Orcs, HCL+3 Minions. Due to their charge, in the first turn of melee PCs have -1 to Defense rolls. Starting with the second turn, all PCs with Heavy Ar- mor have an additional +1 to Defense rolls due to the poor quality of the orcs' clubs.
Reactions (d6): 1-3 Buy Weapons (they pay full price for any weapon above Cheap quality, but will not buy if there are dwarves or elves in the party), 4-6 fight.


d6+3 Cavemen, HCL+2 (Max. 5) Minions, no Treasure. Armed with two-handed clubs. They must roll Morale if one is killed by a fire-based attack. Roll Morale once per encounter, not once per fire-based attack.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-3 Bribe (1 Food Ration per caveman or 1 single gem of any value), 4-6 Fight.

172

Caverns Boss Monsters Table (d6)


Manataur, HCL+4 Chaos Boss, HCL+3 Life, 3 attacks, Treasure
+1, armed with a two-handed axe. This mutant minotaur feeds on magic. Every spell/ prayer cast in its presence, in- cluding those from scrolls or items, adds +1 to its Life.
Reactions (d6): 1-4 Bribe (2 scrolls or potions), 5-6 Fight.

Caveman champion, HCL+4 Boss, HCL+3 Life, 4 attacks, Morale +1, armed with two-handed club. Reactions (d6): 1-2 Challenge of Champions, 3 Bribe (50gp gem or 2-handed weapon), 4-6 Fight.

Hoary Ogre of the Caverns, HCL+4 Boss, HCL+3 Life, 4 attacks, Treasure +1. At the beginning of the encounter, it utters a battle cry. All PCs must Save vs. L4 Fear or lose the ability to explode Attack rolls until the end of the encounter. Paladins are immune to this effect. Halflings add +L to Defense rolls vs. ogres.
Reactions: Always fight.
Cavern Werebear, HCL+3 Were Boss, HCL+4 Life, Mo- rale +1. This were-creature regenerates 1 Life every 3 turns (on the 3rd, 6th, 9th, etc.). Silver weapons hit it with a +Tier bonus. Its bite is not contagious.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Flee, 3-5 Fight, 6 Fight to the death.

Land Siren, HCL+5 Boss, HCL Life (minimum 3), 1 attack (see below), Treasure: 2 rolls. At the start of combat, all living PCs must Save vs. HCL+2 magic or fall asleep. All PCs add +1/2 L to this Save. Halflings reroll a failed Save. The Siren gains 1 Attack for every PC who falls asleep. She fights with her claws. Her glands can be sold to al- chemists for d6x5gp. PCs remaining awake can use 1 turn to wake a sleeping companion. Revived PCs will fight at
-1 to Attack rolls until the end of the encounter. Sleep- ing PCs are automatically hit if attacked (they have no Defense roll).
Reactions (d6): 1-4 Quest, 5-6 Fight.

Fire Bear, HCL+2 Boss, HCL+4 Life, 2 attacks, Never rolls Morale, Treasure: 2 rolls. This six-legged bear be- gins combat by breathing fire on its first turn. All PCs must make a Defense roll vs. HCL+3 or lose 2 Life. It will breathe fire again after any turn in which a PC uses a fire-based attack. In other turns, it performs 2 Attacks with its claws (1 damage each).
Reactions: Always fight to the death

173

Caverns Weird Monsters Table (d6)

Drillworm. HCL+4 WM, HCL+3 Life, 1 attack, Treasure: 2 rolls. Immune to Sleep. Roll d6: 1-3, it enters from an openings in the tile; 4-6, it appears from underground, with a 3-in-6 chance of surprise. Its drill inflicts Tier damage. A PC rolling a 1 on Defense loses 1 of the following (choose): shield, weapon, lantern, scroll, potion, all Food. Non-magical items are destroyed. Magic items are retrieved at the end of the combat.
Reaction: Always fight to the death.
Cavern Wraith, HCL+3 Undead WM, HCL+2 Life (min. 4), Never rolls Morale, Treasure: 2 rolls. Immune to Sleep and poison. Takes 2 damage from holy water. If at the end of the PCs' turn it was not hit, all PCs automatically lose 1 Life.
Reactions (d6): 1 Ignore, 2-3 Blood Offering, 4-6 Fight to the death.
Cavern Sludge, HCL+2 Slime WM, Tier +3 Life, 1 Attack per PC, Never rolls Morale, Treasure: 1 roll. Immune to Sleep and poison. 4-in-6 chance of surprise. All characters, including animals and hirelings, receive 1 attack per turn. If struck by
Lightning, it loses 2L in addition to damage. If it is brought to L0, it is destroyed.
Reaction: Always fight to the death.
Minosaur, HCL+4 WM, HCL+4 Life, 3 attacks. A cross between a lizardman and a minotaur, armed with a two-handed weapon. Its L increases by 1 on its first turn. This does NOT apply if it was hit by ranged attacks prior to melee. Any PC rolling a 1 on a Defense roll is knocked down and must use 1 turn to get back up. Reaction: Always fight.
Cornucopia of Chaos, HCL+6 Chaos Artificial WM, Tier+2 Life, no attacks, Never tests Morale, Treasure: 2 rolls. Immune to Sleep and poison. This construct animated by Chaos does not attack but generates d6 Azure Gremlins (L2 Vermin, never test Morale, no Treasure) per turn. When encountered, it is
guarded by d6+1 gremlins. You may not attack the Cornucopia if there are any gremlins in play, but you can hit it with spells. If the Cornucopia is destroyed, all surviving gremlins turn into lumps of coal worth 1gp each.
Reaction: Always fight to the death.
Cave Dragon, HCL+5 Dragon WM, HCL+4 Life, 2 attacks, Morale
-1, Treasure: 3 rolls. It begins combat by spitting tar. All PCs must roll Defense vs. HCL+3 or be covered in tar. PCs rolling a 1 get tar in their eyes and have -1 to all Attack, Defense and Saves until they spend 1 turn to wipe their face. On other turns, the cave dragon performs 2 claw attacks (1 damage each) and breathes fire. All must Save vs. HCL+3 Fire or lose 1 Life. All Save at +L. PCs covered in tar add no bonus. Halflings re-roll a failed Save. A Water Jet spell removes tar from a PC.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flees, 2-3 Quest, 4 Bribe (50gp gem), 5-6 Fight.
174

Fungal Grottoes Vermin Table (d6)

2d6 Spore Mites, HCL Animal Vermin (max. L3). No Treasure. PCs hit must Save vs. L2 poison or suffer coughing fits: -1 to Attack rolls, non-cumulative, until the end of the encounter.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Flee, 3-6 Fight.

d6 Glowmaggots, HCL Vermin (max. L2), no Treasure. Their glow illuminates the grotto and no lantern/torch is needed in the tile they occupy. Each maggot eaten by a PC counts as 1 Food ration but requires a Save vs. L1 poison (lose 1 Life on a failure). Slain maggots may be used as a light source for 30 minutes/3 rooms, after which their glow fades.
Reactions (d6): 1-3 Ignore, 4-6 Fight.

d6+1 Fungus Leeches, HCL+1 Animal Vermin (max. L4), no Treasure. Immune to poison. PCs hit must Save vs. L4 poison or lose 1 additional Life. Halflings and barbarians Save at +L. A bag of salt thrown at them (2gp in town) will automatically kill 2 leeches. Reactions (d6): 1-3 Flee, 4-6 Fight.

3d6 Myco-Gnats, HCL Vermin (max. L4), no Trea- sure. They distract PCs, giving -1 to all spellcasting rolls and ranged attacks. A Fireball spell will kill all the myco-gnats.
Reactions (d6): 1-4 Flee, 5-6 Fight.

d6 Spore Toads, HCL+2 Vermin (max. L4), Treasure -1. Each turn, roll a 1-in-6 chance that one belches a puff of hallucinogenic spores, causing all PCs to Save vs. L2 magic or be at -1 Defense until the end of the encounter.
Reactions (d6): 1-3 Flee, 4-6 Fight.

2d6 Boneworms, HCL+2 Vermin (max. L5), Treasure: 1 roll. These pale worms crunch bone when feeding. Any PC slain by them cannot be resurrected. Boneworms are not undead but, because of their diet, they are connected with necromantic energies. If a vial of holy water
is thrown at them, they take no damage but must roll Morale.
Reactions (d6): Always Fight.

Fungal Grottoes Minions Table (d6)

d6+2 Spore Men, HCL+2 Minions (max. L8, immune to poi- son, Treasure -1. Living PCs hit must Save vs. L3 poison or lose 1 Life. Mushroom PCs are immune. Hallflings reroll failed Saves.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Bribe (5gp each), 3-6 Fight.

d6+1 Halfling Mushroom Pickers, HCL+1 Minions (max. L5). Armed with knives and slings. On a Trade reaction, they offer d6 random rare mushrooms and 2d6 Food rations
for sale at standard prices, -10% if the party includes any halflings. Treasure: Their goods.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-3 Offer Food and Rest, 4-5 Trade, 6 Fight.

d6 Moldspawn, HCL+3 Minions, no Treasure. Drip- ping, half-decayed humanoids coated in green mold. Immune to poison. PCs hit must Save vs. L2 disease or lose 1 additional Life at the end of the encounter (1 Life per encounter, not 1 Life per hit).
Reactions (d6): 1-3 Bribe (1 Food ration each), 4-6 Fight.

d6+1 Myceliarchs, HCL+3 Minions, Morale+1, Treasure +1. Fungus priests of He Who Lies Below collect blood for their fungal altars. Immune to poison. At the start of combat, one will casts a sleep-spore cloud: all PCs must Save vs. L3 magic or miss their next turn.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-4 Blood offering, 5-6 Fight.

2d6+2 Cave Locusts, HCL Minions (max. L5). Swarming, biting insects. PCs wearing any Armor double its Defense bonus (light armor +2, heavy armor +4). Locusts consume food: If the party carries any Food rations, the party loses d6 Food rations at the end of combat. Distribute the loss of rations as you want among PCs.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Ignore, 3-6 Fight.

d6 Toadstool Knights, HCL+4 Minions, immune to poison, +1 Morale, Standard Treasure. These fungus warriors wield shield-like caps made of dried fungi. The first hit against each toadstool knight breaks its shield but the toadstool knight survives. Casting a Warp Wood spell will destroy all wooden caps.
Reactions (d6): 1 Ignore, 2 Bribe (20gp each), 3-6 Fight.

Fungal Grottoes Boss Monsters Table (d6)

Myco-Tyrant, HCL+4 Mushroom Boss, Tier+3 Life, 3 attacks, Morale +1, 1 Treasure roll. This hulking mushroom brute is immune to Sleep and poison. At the beginning of combat, all PCs must Save vs. L4 poison or lose 1 Life. Mushroom PCs and halflings are immune.
Reaction: Always Fight.
Fungus Hag, HCL+3 Mushroom Boss, Tier+2 Life, 2 at- tacks, Treasure +1. Immune to Sleep/poison. PCs hit by her claws take Tier damage and must Save vs. L3 magic or suffer a non-cumulative -1 to Attack rolls until the end of combat.
Reactions (d6): 1 Blood offering, 2-3 Quest, 4-6 Fight.

Spore Lord, HCL+5 Mushroom Boss, Tier+3 Life, 3 attacks, 2 Treasure rolls. On its first turn, instead of attacking it releases a spore storm: all PCs must Save vs. L5 poison (all PCs add +1/2L to the Save, halflings reroll a failed Save) or be blinded (-1 Attack/Defense) until end of encounter.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-3 Bribe (100gp), 4-6 Fight.

Rot Ogre, HCL+4 Boss, Tier+4 Life, 2 attacks, 2 Trea- sure rolls. Its fists spread decay: each hit requires a Save vs. L3 disease. Halflings and barbarians add
+L. PCs failing the Save lose 1 Life at the end of com- bat. Halflings gain +L Defense against the rot ogre. Reaction: Always Fight to the death.

Caplord Knight, HCL+4 Mushroom Boss, Tier+4 Life, 4 attacks, Treasure: armor and weapon. Immune to Sleep and poison. It wears armor composed of hard- ened fungi and wields a sporeblade, a non-metallic slashing weapon made from a hardened mushroom cap. Any PC hit must Save vs. L3 poison or lose 1 Life. Halflings reroll failed Saves. Any non-magical attack hitting the caplord knight has a 2-in-6 chance of
bouncing off its armor. The Warp Wood spell destroys the armor AND the sporeblade (reduce Foe's L by 2). Reactions (d6): 1-3 Trial of champions, 4-6 Fight.

Fungal Dragon, HCL+5 Mushroom Boss, Tier+3 Life, 4 attacks, Treasure +2. Each turn roll d6: on 1-2, instead of attacking it exhales a spore breath. All PCs must Save vs. L5 poison or lose 1 Life. All PCs add +1/2L to the Save, halflings re- roll failed Saves. Immune to Sleep and poison. Reactions (d6): 1-3 Quest, 4-6 Fight.
177

Fungal Grottoes Weird Monsters Table (d6)


Shroom Colossus, HCL+5 Mushroom WM, Tier+5 Life, 3 attacks, each inflicting Tier damage. No Treasure. May not be encountered in corridors (reroll if it happens). PCs reduced to 0 Life are digested into spores and may not be resurrected. Immune to Sleep and poison.
Reaction: Always Fight.
Spore Swarm, HCL+3 Mushroom WM, Tier+3 Life, no Treasure. Immune to Sleep and poison. Fire-based attacks add a +Tier bonus against it.
Reaction: Always Fight to the death.
Myco-Mimic, HCL+4 Mushroom WM, Tier+2 Life, d3+1 attacks (roll the first time it attacks), 2 Treasure rolls. It appears as an innocuous mushroom or a mush- room-covered treasure chest. It gains automatic sur- prise. PCs hit must Save vs. L3 poison or be paralyzed for 1 turn. Halflings reroll failed Saves. Immune to Sleep and poison.
Reaction: Always Fight to the death.

Hallucinogenic Horror, HCL+3 Mushroom WM, Tier+4 Life, Treasure +1, never tests Morale, Im- mune to Sleep and poison. Each turn, 1 random PC must Save vs. L3 magic or attack an ally instead of the Foe.
Reaction: Always Fight to the death.

Fungus-infected Hydra, HCL+4 dragon WM, Tier+4 Life, Tier+4 attacks, 2 Treasure rolls. The hydra loses 1 attack (representing the loss of 1 head) for each Life point lost. Each head slain regrows in 2 turns. If a fire- based attack is used, heads will not regrow. The hydra always performs a minimum of 1 Attack per turn.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-3 Blood offering, 4-6 Fight.

Spore Phantom, HCL+3 Undead WM, Tier+3 Life, 2 attacks, Treasure +1, never tests Morale. This undead mushroom spirit is immune to Sleep and
poison. It takes 2 damage from a vial of holy water. PCs hit by the phantom must Save vs. L3 magic or lose 1 Life at end of turn as spores rot their lungs. Druids attack spore phantoms at +L.
Reaction: Always Fight to the death.


178












































